Night scene at Malioboro Street
in Yogyakarta, Indonesia.

Targeting
THE POOR
Developing economies face special challenges in delivering social protection
Rema Hanna, Adnan Khan, and Benjamin Olken
28

FINANCE & DEVELOPMENT | December 2018

AGE OF INSECURITY

support is often important during initial program
design and launch, but social protection can be
funded primarily through domestic sources in
the long run.
As many of these countries increasingly initiate
redistribution within their own borders, they are
facing challenges different from those in high-income
countries. Understanding these differences is critical
to grasping how social protection has evolved over
time, and how it may change in the future.

December 2018 | FINANCE & DEVELOPMENT

PHOTO: GETTY IMAGES/SIMONLONG

M

any people believe that social
protection generally involves rich
countries aiding those that are poor.
Aid is important, particularly for
extremely poor countries. Bad shocks can quickly
devolve into humanitarian disasters and promote
conflict in fragile states, as seen with the current
famine in South Sudan, the incipient famine and
cholera in Yemen, and the recent Ebola outbreak
in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
But for the 108 countries the World Bank classifies as “upper-middle” or “lower-middle” income—
for example, India, Morocco, and Peru—overall
tax revenue now dwarfs development assistance.
Given that growth has been accompanied by
increases in global inequality, it is not surprising
that redistribution is increasingly taking place
within countries. In these environments external

In-kind subsidies
The traditional way of providing transfers in many
countries, and one that is still common today, is
to subsidize particular products. Staple foods are
one classic example. Energy is another.
The rationale for this policy tool is simple. In
developed economies, the government can use
income information from tax documents and other
sources to identify who needs assistance. In less
developed settings, however, substantial activity
occurs in the informal sector, particularly among
the poor. There is no paper trail of who is employed
and how much they earn—at least none that can
be easily verified. Instead, governments aim to
subsidize products the poor use disproportionately
so that they get a larger portion of the subsidy.
Subsidies tend to be politically popular for several reasons. The first is transparency; for example, with an energy subsidy, consumers see the
subsidized price at the pump. A second is that
since everyone benefits from subsidies, they may
enjoy broader political support than programs that
benefit only the poor. Finally, governments can
claim that they influence what people consume;
for example, subsidizing eggs or milk to ensure
that kids get enough protein, rather than a cash
subsidy the poor might waste on so-called temptation goods such as alcohol or tobacco.
These arguments have not always been borne
out in practice. For the poor to receive more of the
subsidy calls for subsidization of what economists
call “inferior goods,” goods whose demand decreases
as people get richer—cassava when everyone prefers
rice, low-quality food, and so forth. Subsidizing
inferior goods is often unpopular; instead, most
subsidies end up being for everyday goods—things
people buy more of as they have more income. This
29

undermines redistribution, as these programs end up
benefiting mostly the middle class, or even the rich.
Picking up the tab for more popular goods also
makes subsidies expensive. Energy subsidies are
a classic example. Since everyone can access the
subsidy, it must be quite large in order to ensure
that the poor get a reasonable share, and in most
cases many of the benefits accrue to the middle
class, not the poor. In fact, spending is already so
high for these subsidies that the amount governments would save by eliminating energy subsidies
in emerging market and developing economies
exceeds what many of them spend on public health.
Subsidies also have distortionary consequences.
Energy subsidies, for example, have serious environmental ramifications. Subsidizing particular foods,
such as rice, can backfire in terms of achieving balanced nutrition. And the idea that the poor waste
cash by spending it largely on so-called temptation
goods has been debunked many times, undermining
much of the rationale for trying to influence what
people spend the money on in the first place.
Given the cost and distortionary consequences of
blanket subsidies, many countries fix the quantity
of subsidized goods each household can receive, and
potentially restrict them to poor households. This,
however, introduces a host of other challenges, such
as building a bureaucracy to distribute the goods
and monitor who receives them and how much.
These systems are generally subject to significant
corruption and leakage, given the challenges in
managing them.

Reaching the right households
For these reasons, developing economies are
moving away from universal (or limited) in-kind
subsidies and transfers to the poor and toward
targeted cash transfers of various types. Cash is
neutral and thus does not distort what people
purchase. Moreover, evidence suggests that the
labor-supply consequences of cash transfers are
small—that is, these programs do not seem to
discourage work, often a concern when it comes
to transfer programs. Finally, as an additional benefit, cash transfers can be used as a fiscal stimulus
to smooth negative macroeconomic shocks by
distributing money directly to poor households
that have a high marginal propensity to consume.
30

FINANCE & DEVELOPMENT | December 2018

Targeted cash transfer programs are already widespread in developed economies. For example, the
United States provides poor working families with
cash through the Earned Income Tax Credit. The US
government can do this because the tax system makes
it possible to verify which households are poor, and
the formal banking system has effective mechanisms
to ensure that the poor receive the transfers.
In contrast, many developing economies face
challenges in both targeting and distribution.
The informality of the workforce means that
few people are captured by the tax system, so it
is hard to verify income. And many households
remain unbanked, so transferring funds to them
is logistically difficult.
These challenges are daunting, but developing
economies are finding ways to overcome them.
First, there are alternate methods to target transfers to the poor. A common approach is the “proxy
means test.” Governments predict income using
data from periodic, large-scale quasi censuses of the
population that collect information on easy-to-verify
assets (such as the material of a household’s roof
and floor) and demographics. Households with a
predicted income below a given threshold receive
benefits for a set period of time (for example, until
the next census is conducted).
These methods can be quite effective at achieving redistribution. For example, in recent work,
we compared what would happen if transfers
went to those deemed eligible based on the proxy
means test compared with what would happen
if the same budget were simply divided equally
among everyone (via a universal cash transfer,
also known as universal basic income) for two
programs in Indonesia and Peru.
Even though targeting through proxy means testing has its flaws, we find that it yields higher overall
welfare than the universal transfer, because means
testing concentrates benefits among the poor. Put
another way, per-beneficiary transfers would have
to be much smaller for universal programs than for
targeted transfers, usually because of overall budget
constraints and competing priorities for government
spending (for example, infrastructure development,
education, and so forth). In fact, only in the case
of significant targeting error would the universal
transfer come out ahead.

AGE OF INSECURITY

And although the administrative costs of proxy
means testing may seem high given all the data
collection, the survey costs are minuscule compared
with the amount they save by reducing the number
of rich people who receive transfers.
Of course, there are always exceptions. When
income inequality is extremely high—there is a large
pool of very poor people and a small number of very
rich people—a universal transfer may look more
attractive. Likewise, if poverty is temporary, proxy
means testing, which targets the long-term average
of past income, may allow the poor to fall through
the cracks. Moreover, errors in targeting that do
occur with proxy means tests also generate inequality
among equally poor people, and limits on subsidies
to the middle class can generate political strife.
But additional methods—from including communities in the process to on-demand application—
have been shown to improve targeting along various
dimensions, including program satisfaction and more
flexibility in the timing of identification. For example,
if communities verify the final list of beneficiaries,
excluded households can be added. Instead of visiting
all households for the proxy means survey, households
that believe themselves eligible could enroll at an
office; only those close to the eligibility threshold
would need home verification. Supplementing a proxy
means test with these additional approaches could
help resolve some of the challenges of targeting.
How can the cash be distributed? Banking systems
and technology are changing rapidly in many developing economies, reducing leakage in cash distribution.
Recent studies show that modern banking technology—
biometric smart cards—can help dramatically reduce
corruption in cash transfer programs. As mobile
money continues to gain prominence, it will likely
play an increasing role in delivering transfers.

Increasing capacity
How can developing economies further improve
their capacity to deliver social protection?
• Strengthen the tax system: Compared with developed economies, lower-income countries collect
a smaller fraction of GDP and subsequently face
greater budget constraints. But, without sufficient
government funds, redistribution is impossible.
As more people are covered by the relevant tax
authority, taxation can become more progressive.

• Develop clear identification systems: In an example we studied, one of the biggest challenges to
enrollment within a government health insurance
program was a lack of a functioning identification
system to track people. A clear and well-functioning
identification system is an essential foundation for
social protection systems.
• Invest in effective targeting: Identifying beneficiaries for targeted transfer programs calls for
up-front investment to develop targeting that
minimizes both rent seeking and the degree to
which poor households are excluded. The sticker
price for these systems may seem high, but it
pales in comparison with the transfers being
paid. Spending 1 or 2 percent of the cost of the
transfers on better targeting can make a huge

The amount governments would
save by eliminating subsidies
exceeds what many of them
spend on public health.
difference in the degree to which the programs
improve welfare for the poor.
• Improve access to banking: With new banking technology, especially mobile banking, there is an opportunity to improve the distribution of cash transfers.
But it will take careful planning—from the types of
technology that are feasible to ways to help the poor
access and understand this technology.
• Recognize that a variety of approaches may be
needed: Although the focus of this article is mostly
anti-poverty programs, insurance programs—for
example, pensions and unemployment benefits—
are also an important component of redistributive
systems, helping households minimize risk that
could distort their behavior.
REMA HANNA is the Jeffrey Cheah Professor of South East Asia
Studies at Harvard University’s Kennedy School of Government,
ADNAN KHAN is research and policy director of the
International Growth Centre at the London School of Economics
and Political Science, and BENJAMIN OLKEN is professor of
economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
December 2018 | FINANCE & DEVELOPMENT

31

