International Social Security
Association

Extending social protection to
migrant workers, refugees and
their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Extending social protection to
migrant workers, refugees and
their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Copyright © International Labour Organization 2021
First published 2021
Publications of the International Labour Office enjoy copyright under Protocol 2 of the Universal Copyright
Convention. Nevertheless, short excerpts from them may be reproduced without authorization, on
condition that the source is indicated. For rights of reproduction or translation, application should be made
to ILO Publishing (Rights and Licensing), International Labour Office, CH-1211 Geneva 22, Switzerland, or
by email: rights@ilo.org. The International Labour Office welcomes such applications.
Libraries, institutions and other users registered with a reproduction rights organization may make copies
in accordance with the licences issued to them for this purpose. Visit www.ifrro.org to find the reproduction
rights organization in your country.
Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families: A guide for policymakers and
practitioners – Geneva: ILO, 2021.”
ISBN: 9789220339633 (Print)
ISBN: 9789220339640 (web pdf)
The designations employed in ILO publications, which are in conformity with United Nations practice,
and the presentation of material therein do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the
part of the International Labour Office concerning the legal status of any country, area or territory or of
its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers.
The responsibility for opinions expressed in signed articles, studies and other contributions rests solely
with their authors, and publication does not constitute an endorsement by the International Labour Office
of the opinions expressed in them.
Reference to names of firms and commercial products and processes does not imply their endorsement
by the International Labour Office, and any failure to mention a particular firm, commercial product or
process is not a sign of disapproval. ‘
This document has been produced with the financial assistance of the European Union, ICMPD and
ECOWAS. The contents of this document can under no circumstances be regarded as reflecting the position
of the European Union, ICMPD or ECOWAS.
Information on ILO publications and digital products can be found at: www.ilo.org/publns.

Photo Credits
Page 18: India-Marcel Crozet / ILO
Page 24: China-Marcel Crozet / ILO
Page 40: Marcel Crozet / ILO-China
Page 64: Vietnam-Truong Van Vi / ILO
Page 97: Philippines© ILO/J. Aliling 2015
Page 98: Beijing © ILO
Page 108: Beijing2 © ILO
Page 110: Madagascar-Marcel Crozet / ILO
Page 139: Bahrain- ILO/Apex Image
Page 140: Nepal-Marcel Crozet/ILO
Page 174: Tunisia-Marcel Crozet / ILO
Page 198: Zambia-Marcel Crozet / ILO
Page 226: Philippines. © ILO/Minette Rimando

The ILO endeavours to use paper sourced from forests managed in an
environmentally sustainable and socially responsible manner.

3

► Contents
► Foreword

8

► Acknowledgements

11

► List of abbreviations

12

► Glossary

14

► Introduction

19

► Chapter 1: Rationale for extending social protection to migrant workers and their families

25

1.1 Introduction

27

1.2 Why extend social protection to migrant workers and their families?

27

1.3 What are the legal restrictions and practical barriers?

30

1.3.1 The underlying causes

30

1.3.2 Legal restrictions on migrant workers’ access to social protection benefits

31

1.3.3 Practical barriers to migrant workers’ access to social protection benefits

32

1.4 What are the policy options for extending social protection to migrant workers and their
families? The ILO’s approach

34

1.5 Conclusion

35

► Chapter 2: Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

41

2.1 Introduction

43

2.2 The right to social security under human rights instruments

43

2.2.1 International human rights instruments

43

2.2.2 Regional human rights treaties

47

2.3 ILO standards of relevance to migrant workers’ social protection

50

2.3.1 ILO social security instruments

53

2.3.2 ILO migrant workers instruments

56

2.3.3 Other relevant ILO instruments

57

2.4 Putting ILO standards into practice: ratification, compliance and implementation at the 			
national level
58
2.4.1 The ILO’s supervisory procedures for ensuring compliance with international 		
labour standards
58
2.4.2 Why ratify ILO Conventions?

59

2.4.3 Status of ratifications in the world

60

2.5 Conclusion
► Chapter 3: Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

61
65

3.1 Introduction

67

3.2 Bilateral and multilateral agreements: rationale, key elements and challenges

67

3.2.1 Rationale

67

3.2.2 Key elements of social security agreements

69

3.2.3 Obstacles and challenges

71

3.2.4 Advantages and disadvantages of bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

71

3.2.5 The ISSA database on social security agreements

74

4

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

3.3 Bilateral social security agreements

75

3.3.1 France – Tunisia

75

3.3.2 Spain – Morocco

75

3.3.3 Canada – Mexico

75

3.3.4 Malawi – Zambia

76

3.3.5 Slovenia – Bosnia and Herzegovina

76

3.3.6 India – Japan

76

3.3.7 Moldova – various countries

77

3.3.8 United States of America – various countries

78

3.4 Multilateral social security agreements

78

3.4.1 Andean Community (CAN) Instrument on Social Security

78

3.4.2 Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Agreement on Social Security

79

3.4.3 Inter-African Conference on Social Insurance (CIPRES) Multilateral Convention on 			
Social Security
79
3.4.4 Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) General Convention on 			
Social Security
80
3.4.5 The European Union Experience

80

3.4.6 Ibero-American Multilateral Convention on Social Security

81

3.4.7 MERCOSUR Multilateral Agreement on Social Security

82

3.4.8 Southern African Development Community (SADC) frameworks and policies on			
social security
83
3.5 How to negotiate a social security agreement

84

3.5.1 Prior to the negotiation process

84

3.5.2 The negotiation process

84

3.6 Putting agreements into practice: Institutional, operational and administrative considerations

88

3.6.1 Governance and management

89

3.6.2 Operational processes and information models

90

3.6.3 Security and authentication

90

3.6.4 ICT-based data exchange systems

91

3.6.5 Additional considerations

92

3.7 Conclusion
► Chapter 4: Bilateral labour agreements and migrant workers’ social protection

93
99

4.1 Introduction

101

4.2 Objectives, form and scope of BLAs

101

4.3 The international legal framework

102

4.4 Obstacles, protection gaps and challenges

105

4.5 From right to reality: Country practices

106

4.6 Conclusion

107

► Chapter 5: Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

111

5.1 Introduction

113

5.2 Unilateral measures

114

5.2.1 Countries of employment

114

5.2.2 Countries of origin

125

5.3 Complementary measures

132

5.4 Other initiatives

134

5.5 Conclusion

135

5

► Chapter 6: Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

141

Introduction

144

6.1 Migrant domestic workers

144

6.1.1 The international legal framework as it applies to migrant domestic workers

146

6.1.2 Obstacles, protection gaps and challenges

148

6.1.3 From right to reality: Extending social protection to migrant domestic workers

149

6.2 Migrant seasonal agricultural workers

152

6.2.1 International legal frameworks of relevance to migrant seasonal agricultural workers

154

6.2.2 Obstacles, protection gaps and challenges

155

6.2.3 From right to reality: Extending social protection to migrant seasonal agricultural workers

157

6.3 Migrant workers in an irregular situation

160

6.3.1 International legal provisions on migrant workers in an irregular situation

160

6.3.2 Obstacles, protection gaps and challenges

163

6.3.3 From right to reality: Extending social protection to migrant workers in an irregular situation 165
6.4 Conclusion
► Chapter 7: Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

168
175

7.1 Introduction

177

7.2 International legal framework

178

7.2.1 Definitions under various international instruments

178

7.2.2 Refugees and access to work

179

7.2.3 Refugees and the right to social protection

182

7.3 Obstacles, protection gaps and challenges

187

7.3.1 Legal obstacles

187

7.3.2 Practical obstacles

187

7.3.3 Specific obstacles faced by asylum seekers

188

7.4 From right to reality: country practices

188

7.4.1 Why extend social protection to refugees and asylum seekers?

188

7.4.2 Policy options and country practices

189

7.5 Addressing social protection gaps: The ILO’s response

192

7.6 Conclusion

193

► Chapter 8: Gender, social protection and labour migration

199

8.1 Introduction

201

8.2 Concepts and trends: the experience of migration from a gender perspective

203

8.3 International standards and instruments that promote gender-responsive social 			
protection of migrant workers
205
8.3.1 Key UN Conventions

205

8.3.2 Key international labour standards

206

8.3.3 Complementary international agendas
8.4 Gender gaps in social protection: Obstacles and challenges

211
213

8.5 Gender-responsive social protection policies for migrant workers: Policy options and 		
recommendations
216
8.6 Complementary measures

219

8.7 Conclusion

220

► A call for action

226

6

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► List of boxes
Box 1.1

The impact of COVID-19 on migrant workers and the importance of social protection	

29

Box 1.2.

Links to country examples 	

32

Box 1.3

ILO action	

36

Box 2.1

The position of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on migrant workers’
entitlement to social security	

45

Box 2.2

Access to Covenant rights, irrespective of migration or refugee status	

45

Box 2.3

Paying attention to the rights of women	

46

Box 2.4

The rights of non-documented migrants and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights: A
landmark decision	

48

Box 2.5

International human and labour rights and the COVID-19 crisis 	

50

Box 2.6

Basic social security guarantees for all residents and children 

54

Box 2.7

COVID-19 and a few examples of countries’ response with respect to healthcare	

58

Box 3.1

The ILO Multilateral Framework on Labour Migration	

67

Box 3.2

The Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration	

68

Box 3.3

Key principles promoted by ILO Conventions and Recommendations with regard to the
coordination of social security schemes and the protection of migrant workers 	

69

Box 3.4

Portability of social security entitlements and earned benefits	

73

Box 3.5

ILO project: Extending access to social protection and portability of benefits to migrant workers
and their families in selected Regional Economic Communities (RECs) in Africa	

82

Box 4.1.

Articles relating to social security in the ILO Model Agreement on Temporary and Permanent
Migration for Employment, including Migration of Refugees and Displaced Persons	

104

Box 5.1

Unilateral measures: A non-limitative list of policy options for countries of destination	

115

Box 5.2

Migration and social security as two fundamental rights enshrined in the 2008 Constitution of Ecuador	

119

Box 5.3

Ghana	

122

Box 5.4

Viet Nam	

122
125

Box 5.5

Unilateral measures – a non-limitative list of policy options for countries of origin 	

Box 5.6

Unilateral measures implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic	

132

Box 6.1

Barriers to the extension of social protection to domestic workers	

149

Box 6.2

Chile and the extension of social protection to all domestic workers, including migrants	

152

Box 6.3

Further challenges in light of COVID-19	

156

Box 6.4

Costa Rica: Improving healthcare for indigenous migrant seasonal workers and their families 	

159

Box 6.5

Basic social security guarantees for all residents and children	

163

Box 6.6

Portugal’s Strategic Plan for Migration

167

Box 7.1

The Global Compact on Refugees	

181

Box 7.2

Protecting the rights of refugees and other forcibly displaced persons during the COVID-19 pandemic	

185

Box 7.3

Brazil’s promotion of refugee rights	

190

Box 7.4

Morocco’s reform enhancing the rights of migrants, refugees and asylum seekers	

191

Box 7.5

Turkey’s Transition to Formality Programme (KIGEP)	

193

Box 8.1

Key concepts	

202

Box 8.2

SDG Goal 5 – Gender equality		

212

Box 8.3

Women and old-age poverty	

213

Box 8.4

The burden of unpaid care work	

214

Box 8.5

The impact of COVID-19 on gender inequality	

215

7

► List of figures
Figure 2.1

Countries that grant equality of treatment with respect to social security (excluding healthcare),
with an indication of whether they have ratified Convention No. 118	

55

Figure 3.1

Change in the number of social security agreements, 1955-2020	

74

Figure 3.2

Increase in the number of bilateral social security agreements for each region, 1960– 2020	

74

Figure 3.3.

Branches covered across all bilateral social security agreements as at 2020	

74

Figure 3.4

An eight-step process	

85

Figure 3.5

Architecture and types of interaction for a multilateral agreement	

89

Figure 3.6

Typical data exchange workflow between two institutions under an international social security
agreement	

Figure 5.1

Change in the number of social security agreements, 1955–2020	

113

Figure 5.2

Number of countries per region with legal provisions on equality of treatment with respect to
social security	

117

Figure 5.3

Number of countries per region with legal provisions on equality of treatment in respect of
access to healthcare	

117

Figure 5.4

Membership fees for registration with welfare funds	

128

Figure 5.5

Services provided by the welfare funds of Sri Lanka and the Philippines	

128

Figure 5.6

Social protection floors for migrant workers throughout their life cycle	

131

Figure 6.1

Global situation of the statutory coverage of social security for domestic workers (2021)	

144

Figure 6.2

Number of migrant domestic workers, by subregion (2013)	

145

Figure 6.3

Number of migrant domestic workers per region, 2013	

145

Figure 6.4

Intersecting provisions on migrant domestic workers under ILO instruments	

146

Figure 6.5

Number of countries that have social security provisions for domestic workers with an indication
of whether migrant workers are also covered 	

151

Figure 6.6

Occurrence and extent of crises, 1980–2012	

153

Figure 6.7

Global distribution of international migrant workers, by broad branch of economic activity, 2019	

153

91

► List of tables
Table 2.1

Overview of key principles enshrined in ILO Conventions and Recommendations	

51

Table 2.2

Number of ratifications, by ILO Convention	

60

Table 3.1

Coordination vs. harmonization	

70

Table 3.2

Bilateral vs. multilateral social security agreements	

72

Table 3.3

Criteria for the architecture of international agreements	

92

Table 4.1

International legal frameworks that mention the importance of BLAs	

103

Table 6.1

International labour standards of relevance to migrant seasonal agricultural workers	

154

Table 6.2

SAWP workers’ access to healthcare and social security benefits	

158

Table 6.3.

ILO Conventions and Recommendations with provisions applicable to specific groups of
migrant workers.	

162

Table 8.1

Key UN Conventions with provisions on gender-responsive social protection for migrant workers	

205

8

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Foreword
For the 169 million migrant workers who are contributing to economies and societies, access to social
protection is a major challenge. In light of the current
migratory landscape, its changing labour market needs
and realities and the COVID-19 crisis, the importance
of social protection for migrant workers, refugees and
their families cannot be overstated.
Exclusion from social protection, including healthcare,
is not only a violation of human rights; it also has
socio-economic repercussions on migrants, their
families and society as a whole. Unprotected migrant
workers are more likely to be living in poverty and less
likely to send remittances to their home countries. This
reduces prospects for socio-economic development in
both countries of employment and countries of origin.
The COVID-19 crisis has also shed light on abysmal
inequalities, discrimination and protection gaps.
These are some of the reasons why access to social
protection for all, including migrant workers and
refugees, is among the priorities of the United Nations
(UN) 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and is
highlighted in the International Labour Organization
(ILO) Centenary Declaration for the Future of Work,
2019 as one of the cornerstones of a brighter future.
The Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration, adopted by the UN General Assembly in
2018, also recognizes the importance of protecting
workers across borders and ensuring access to and
portability of social protection rights and entitlements.
Notwithstanding the existence of a clear international
legal framework governing the right to social security,
this right does not translate into universal, effective
access to healthcare and social security benefits for all
migrant workers around the world. On the contrary,
in many countries, legal, administrative and other
obstacles hinder migrants’ access to social protection.

Enabling migrant workers to enjoy and maintain
social security rights across borders is an important
challenge for developing and industrialized countries
alike, yet it is also an opportunity to facilitate labour
mobility, return and reintegration. Access to adequate
social protection in countries of origin, transit and
destination can allow workers to migrate by choice,
not out of necessity. It is also key to attracting skilled
workers, facilitating migrant women’s integration into
the workforce, and thus improving the functioning of
labour markets.
The idea of adapting social protection policies and
schemes to make them more inclusive of migrant
workers is gaining momentum at the global level. This
Guide named Extending Social Protection to Migrant
Workers, Refugees and their Families: Guide for Policymakers and Practitioners (hereafter the Guide) seeks
to provide policymakers, practitioners, migration
specialists, social protection specialists and other
stakeholders with practical guidance on how to extend
social protection to migrant workers, refugees and
their families.
Human rights instruments and ILO Conventions and Recommendations provide a solid legal
framework and useful guidance for extending social
protection. Involving the social partners in the design
and implementation of social security reforms is
indispensable to ensuring balanced outcomes and
the sustainability of social protection measures. It is
also important to consult migrant workers, refugees
and their families in order to design policies and
agreements that meet their needs.

9

This Guide provides a variety of policy and administrative
options for consideration and adaptation to specific
groups and situations, taking the complexity of
current migratory movements into account. The policy
measures presented are accompanied by selected
country and regional practices. The Guide is based on
several years of experience by ILO member States –
including governments and workers’ and employers’
organizations – in making the right to social protection
a reality for all. It is the outcome of long-standing
collaboration between the ILO Social Protection
Department and Labour Migration Branch, the
International Training Centre of the ILO (ITCILO) and
the International Social Security Association (ISSA) and
builds on the technical expertise of numerous experts
deployed across every region of the world.

Floors for All. It also benefited from collaboration with
experts from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It builds on
various training courses offered throughout the world
over the past ten years, which enriched its content
with valuable exchanges of experiences and country
practices. Ultimately, it will be used in ILO training
courses on labour migration and social protection and
will be incorporated into an interactive learning tool to
be developed in collaboration with the ITCILO in 2021.

The Guide was pilot tested through a number of ILO
projects including in the context of the Organization’s
Flagship Programme on Building Social Protection

We hope that the Guide will provide both a valuable
tool for practitioners and an evidence-based resource
for policymakers, including workers’ and employers’
representatives, in their efforts to strengthen
social protection, promote social justice and foster
sustainable development, especially in the field of
migration. Together, these efforts will bring the world
a step closer to making the right to social security for
all a reality.

Michelle Leighton,

Raúl Ruggia-Frick

Chief, Labour Migration Branch
Conditions of Work and Equality Department
ILO

Director, Social Security Development Branch

Valerie Schmitt

Andreas Klemmer

Deputy Director, Social Protection Department

Director, Training Department
ITCILO

ILO

ISSA

10

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

The International Labour Organization (ILO) was founded in 1919 to promote social justice and thereby
contribute to universal and lasting peace. It is responsible for drawing up and overseeing international labour
standards and is the only tripartite United Nations agency that brings together representatives of governments,
employers and workers to jointly shape policies and programmes promoting decent work for all. This unique
arrangement gives the ILO an edge in incorporating “real world” knowledge about employment and work.

The International Social Security Association (ISSA) was founded in 1927 under ILO auspices and today has
over 320 member institutions from over 160 countries around the world. It promotes excellence in social security
administration through professional standards, expert knowledge, research and analysis, services, capacitybuilding and support and offers a unique opportunity for social security experts and administrators to meet.

The International Training Centre of the ILO (ITCILO) was founded in 1964 by the ILO and the Government of
Italy as an advanced technical and vocational training institution. It seeks to achieve decent work for all women and
men by offering learning, knowledge-sharing and institutional capacity-building programmes to governments,
workers’ and employers’ organizations and development partners. This is enhanced through the Centre’s ability
to create a forum where development intersects with all forms of knowledge in the world of work, from tripartism
to technology.

11

► Acknowledgements
This Guide was prepared with support from specialists
in the ILO Labour Migration Branch, Conditions of Work
and Equality Department, the ILO Social Protection
Department and the ISSA and was coordinated by
its primary authors, Samia Kazi Aoul and Clara van
Panhuys (ILO, Geneva).
The Guide and the related training courses would not
have been possible without ongoing collaboration
with the ISSA and the ITCILO. Special appreciation and
gratitude are owed to Raúl Ruggia-Frick, Head of the
Centre for Excellence Knowledge, ISSA, and Mariano
Brener, Regional Coordinator for the Americas, ISSA,
who co-authored and reviewed specific chapters of
the Guide and delivered several training courses, and
to Miriam Boudraa, Activity Manager, ITCILO, and
her team for organizing the training courses that
supported its development and for their contributions
to the forthcoming interactive learning tool.
The authors would also like to thank Sandra Berger
(overall review, country practices, boxes), Geneviève
Binette (Chapter 2), Kenza Dimechkie (Chapter 4),
Olena Vazhynska (Chapter 6.1), Marta Gionco (Chapter
7), Cassandre Guibord Cyr (Chapter 8) and Rodolfo
Honorato (country practices) for their contributions to
the research and drafting of selected chapters of the
Guide.
Also appreciated are the technical contributions and
feedback received from Christina Behrendt, Maya
Stern-Plaza, Alejandro Bonilla Garcia, Stefan Urban and
Shana Hoehler (ILO Social Protection Department);
Markus Ruck (ILO Regional Office for Asia and the
Pacific); Aurelia Segatti (ILO Country Office for Algeria,
Libya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia); Ursula Kulke

and Greta Cartoceti (ILO Bureau for Workers’ Activities
(ACTRAV)); Henrik Moller and Christian Hess (Bureau
for Employers’ Activities (ACTEMP)); Christiane Kuptsch,
Katerine Landuyt, Fabiola Mieres, Claire Hobden,
Florence Bonnet, Katherine Gilchrist, Héloïse Ruaudel
and Mahanam Mithun (ILO Conditions of Work and
Equality Department);
Lastly, the authors would like to thank UNHCR for its
contributions to Chapter 7.
The Guide, financed by the ILO, also received external
financial contributions from the Extending social
protection access and portability of benefits to migrant
workers and their families in selected Regional Economic
Communities (RECs) in Africa project, funded by the
European Commission (EC) through the International
Centre for Migration Policy Development (ICMPD),
and from the Support to Free Movement of Persons
and Migration in West Africa project, funded by the
European Union (EU) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS).
The authors are grateful to Manuela Tomei, Director of
the ILO Conditions of Work and Equality Department;
Michelle Leighton, Chief of the Labour Migration
Branch of the Conditions of Work and Equality
Department; and Shahra Razavi, Director and Valérie
Schmitt, Deputy Director of the ILO Social Protection
Department for supporting the initiative throughout
its development and for their review and guidance.
Lastly, the members of the team would like to thank
the individuals not listed here who provided assistance
and guidance during the development and implementation of the Guide.

12

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► List of abbreviations
ACHR

American Convention on Human Rights

ASEAN

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

BLA

Bilateral labour agreement

BLMA

Bilateral labour migration agreements

CAN

Andean Community

CARICOM

Caribbean Community

CAS

Committee on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations (International Labour
Conference)

CEACR

ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations

CESCR

United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights

CFE

Social Security Fund for French Nationals Abroad

CIPRES

Inter-African Conference on Social Insurance

CIS

Commonwealth of Independent States

CMW

Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families

CNAV

National Retirement Pension Fund, France

CRRF

UNHCR Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework

CSV

Comma-separated values

DOLE

Department of Labour and Employment, Philippines

EC

European Commission

ECOWAS

Economic Community of West African States

EESSI

Electronic Exchange of Social Security Information

EHIC

European Health Insurance Card

ELS

Employment and Labour Sector

EPF

Employee’s Provident Fund, India

EPS

Employee’s Pension Scheme, India

EU

European Union

HIV/AIDS

Human Immunodeficiency Virus / Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

HRC

United Nations Human Rights Committee

ICAFE

Costa Rican Coffee Institute

ICCPR

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, United Nations

ICESCR

International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, United Nations

ICRMW

International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
their Families, United Nations

ICT

Information and communications technology

IDWF

International Domestic Workers’ Federation

IFC

International Finance Corporation

ILC

International Labour Conference, ILO

ILO

International Labour Organization

IMMS

Mexican Social Security Institute

IOM

International Organization for Migration

ITCILO

International Training Centre of the ILO

IUC

International University College of Turin

ISO

International Organization for Standardization

ISSA

International Social Security Association

13

IT

Information technology

KIGEP

Transition to Formality Programme, Turkey

KNOMAD

Global Knowledge Partnership on Migration and Development

LGBTI

Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and inter-sex

MERCOSUR

Southern Common Market

MoU

Memorandum/a of understanding

MPI

Migration Policy Institute

NHS

National health system

NPIA

National Policy on Immigration and Asylum, Morocco

OAS

Organization of American States

OAU

Organization of African Unity

ODI

Overseas Development Institute

OECD

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

OHCHR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights

OISS

Ibero-American Social Security Organization

OPF

Overseas Pakistanis Foundation

OSH

Occupational safety and health

OWWA

Overseas Workers Welfare Administration, Philippines

OWWF

Overseas Workers Welfare Fund, Sri Lanka

PhilHealth

Philippines Health Insurance

RECs

Regional economic communities

RISDP

Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan

SADC

Southern African Development Community

SDGs

Sustainable Development Goals

SLBFE

Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment

SPF

Social protection floors

SPIAC-B

ILO Social Protection Inter-agency Cooperation Board

SSA

Social Security Administration, United States of America

SSC

Social Security Corporation, Jordan

SSI

ILO Social Security Inquiry database

SSNIT

Social Security National Insurance Trust, Ghana

SSS

Social Security System, Philippines

SWAP

Seasonal Agricultural Workers Program, Canada

TFWP

Temporary foreign worker programme

UN

United Nations

UNDESA

United Nations Department of Economics and Social Affairs

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

UNFPA

United Nations Population Fund

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

UNWomen

United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women

XML

Extensible Markup Language

14

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Glossary
This Glossary identifies the basic concepts and definitions in the field of migration and social protection.
It does not provide universal definitions; rather, its
purpose is to explain the terms and concepts used in
the chapters of the Guide.
Asylum seeker
An asylum seeker is a person who is seeking international protection but whose claim is still pending and
who is thus a candidate for refugee status. Until a
decision has been issued by the deciding authority,
governments are not permitted to return asylum
seekers to their home countries (UN Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees).
Bilateral labour agreements (BLAs)
Bilateral labour agreements are labour agreements
concluded between countries of origin and destination
in order to regulate migration for employment.
Bilateral labour migration agreements (BLMAs)
Bilateral labour migration agreements is a term
that is used generically to describe bilateral labour
agreements that create legally binding rights
and obligations governed by international law;
non-binding memoranda of understanding (MoUs)
that establish a broad framework of cooperation to
address common concerns; and other arrangements,
including between specific government ministries or
agencies in destination and origin countries. Broader
framework or cooperation agreements that include
both labour migration and other migration topics, such
as irregular migration, readmission, and migration and
development, are also included in this typology (ILC
2017, para. 68).

Documented migrants
Documented migrants are also referred to as migrants
in a regular situation. According to Article 5 of the
International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their
Families (ICRMW), migrant workers are considered to
be documented if “they are authorized to enter, to stay
and to engage in a remunerated activity in the State
of employment pursuant to the law of that State and
to international agreements to which that State is a
party”. If they do not meet these conditions, they are
considered to be non-documented or in an irregular
situation.
Domestic workers
A domestic worker is defined as “any person engaged
in domestic work within an employment relationship;
(…) a person who performs domestic work only
occasionally or sporadically and not on an occupational
basis is not a domestic worker” (ILO Domestic Workers
Convention, 2011 (No. 189), Art. 1(b) and (c)).
Exportability
Exportability refers to the maintenance of acquired
rights and payment of benefits abroad.1 It requires
action on the part of only one country. Eligibility for
benefits and the level of benefits paid are determined
by the social security institution of that country.
Forced or compulsory labour
Forced or compulsory labour is defined as “all work or
service which is exacted from any person under the
menace of any penalty and for which the said person
has not offered himself voluntarily” (ILO Forced Labour
Convention, 1930 (No. 29), Art. 2(1)).

Bilateral and multilateral social security
agreements
Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements
are treaties designed to coordinate the social security
schemes of two or more countries in order to overcome
barriers that might otherwise prevent migrant workers
from receiving benefits under the systems of any of the
countries in which they have worked (Hirose, Nikač and
Tamagno 2011, p.19).

Gender
Gender “refers to the social attributes and opportunities associated with being male and female and the
relationships between women and men and girls and
boys and the relations between women and those
between men. These attributes, opportunities and
relationships are socially constructed and are learned
through socialization processes” (UNWomen n.d.
“Concepts and definitions”).

Circular migrants
Circular migrants are a subcategory of temporary
migrants who move periodically between their
countries of origin and destination, mainly for
purposes of work or study. The term includes seasonal
migrant workers and agricultural workers involved in
rural-urban migration.

Informal economy
The informal economy includes “all economic activities
by workers or economic units that are – in law or
practice – not covered or not sufficiently covered
by formal arrangements, including wageworkers
and own-account workers” (ILO Transition from the
Informal to the Formal Economy Recommendation,
2015 (No. 204), para. 2(a)). This is different from the

1

See, among others, Taha, Siegmann and Messkoub 2015 and Sabates-Wheeler and Koettl 2010.

15

term “informal sector”, which refers to a group of
production units (unincorporated enterprises owned
by households), including informal own-account and
informal employers’ enterprises.

on general principles of cooperation. It sets out broad
concepts of mutual understanding, goals and plans
shared by the parties. These are usually non-binding
instruments.

International migrants
International migrants are “all residents of a given
country who have ever changed their country of usual
residence. For the purpose of practical measurement
and in line with United Nations recommendations,
international migrants may be measured as all persons
who are usual residents of that country and who are
citizens of another country (foreign population) or
whose place of birth is located in another country
(foreign-born population)” (ICLS 2018, para. 13).

A migrant worker
A migrant worker is “a person who migrates or who
has migrated from one country to another with a
view to being employed otherwise than on his own
account and includes any person regularly admitted as
a migrant worker” (Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143), Art. 11(1)). In
statistical terms, “international migrant worker” refers
to “all persons of working age present in the country
of measurement”, whether or not they are usual
residents and non-resident foreign workers (ICLS
2018). This definition builds on Article 2(1) of the United
Nations Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
all Migrant Workers and Members of their Families,
which defines a migrant worker as “a person who is
to be engaged or has been engaged in a remunerated
activity in a state of which he or she is not a national”.

Internally displaced persons (IDPs)
Internally displaced persons are “persons or groups
of persons who have been forced or obliged to flee or
to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in
particular as a result of or in order to avoid the effects
of armed conflict, situations of generalized violence,
violations of human rights or natural or human-made
disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally
recognized State border” (Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR 2004,
Introduction, para. 2).
Labour mobility
Labour mobility refers to the temporary or
short-term movement of persons for employment-related purposes, particularly in the context of the
free movement of workers in regional economic
communities (ILO 2017, para. 6).
LGBTI
The acronym “LGBTI” refers to lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons. The terms “lesbian”,
“gay” and “bisexual” refer to sexual orientation, that is,
the gender or genders to whom a person is sexually
attracted, while “transgender” refers to gender
identity, that is, “someone whose gender differs from
the one they were given when they were born”. Terms
like “gender-queer” and “non-binary” refer to people
who fall outside the construction of gender as male
or female. Intersex people are born with physical or
biological sex characteristics, such as reproductive or
sexual anatomy, hormones or chromosomes, that do
not seem to fit the typical definitions of female or male
(UNRISD n.d.).
Memorandum of understanding (MoU)
A memorandum of understanding is a type of
agreement that is used where the parties have agreed

Migrants in an irregular situation
Under international standards, migrants are
considered to be in an irregular or non-documented
situation unless they are authorised “to enter, to stay
and to engage in a remunerated activity in the State
of employment pursuant to the law of that State and
to international agreements to which that State is a
party” (International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their
Families, Art. 5). In its General Comment No. 2, the UN
Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers states that “the term ‘in an irregular situation’
or ‘non-documented’ is the proper terminology when
referring to their status. The use of the term ‘illegal’
to describe migrant workers in an irregular situation
is inappropriate and should be avoided as it tends to
stigmatize them by associating them with criminality”
(CMW 2013, para. 4).
Migrants in a regular situation
Migrants in a regular situation are persons who are
authorized to enter, stay and engage in a remunerated
activity in a host state in accordance with its applicable
laws.
Non-contributory schemes
Non-contributory schemes are “including non-meanstested and means-tested schemes, [and] normally
require no direct contribution from beneficiaries or
their employers as a condition of entitlement to receive
relevant benefits. The term covers a broad range of
schemes, including universal schemes for all residents

16

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

(such as national health services), categorical schemes
for certain broad groups of the population (such as
children below a certain age or older persons above
a certain age), and means-tested schemes (such as
social assistance schemes). Non-contributory schemes
are usually financed through taxes or other state
revenues, or, in certain cases, through external grants
or loans” (ILO 2016a, p. 194).
Permanent migrant
According to the ILO, a permanent migrant is “a person
who enters with the right of permanent residence or
with a visa or permit which is indefinitely renewable.
Permanent immigrants would generally include
marriage immigrants, family members of permanent
residents, refugees, certain labour migrants, etc.” (ILO
2017, para. 21).
Portability of earned benefits
Portability of earned benefits is a term that has no
internationally agreed definition. It usually refers to
measures aimed at the maintenance of acquired rights
and to the payment of benefits abroad.
Portability of social security rights and benefits
Portability of social security rights and benefits is a
term that has no internationally agreed definition. The
term “portability” is often used to refer to measures
aimed at the maintenance of rights that are acquired
or in the course of acquisition and to the payment of
benefits abroad (Holzmann et al. 2016, p.1; and Taha,
Siegmann and Messkoub 2015). Portability requires
cooperation between the host and origin countries.
Posted workers
Posted workers are “employees who are sent by their
employer to carry out a service in another jurisdiction
on a temporary basis” (ISSA, Contribution Collection and
Compliance, Guideline 7: Establishing a strategy for
mobile workers). According to the European Union, a
posted worker is “a worker who, for a limited period,
carries out his work in the territory of a Member State
other than the State in which he normally works” (EU
1996, Art. 2(1)).
Refugee
A refugee is a person who, “owing to a well-founded
fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political opinion, is the country of its nationality and
is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling, to avail
himself of the protection of that country; or who, not
having a nationality and being outside the country of
his former habitual residence as a result of such events,
is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return
to it” (Convention relating to the Status of Refugees,
Art. 1(2)).

Seasonal workers
Seasonal workers are migrant workers “whose work
by its character is dependent on seasonal conditions
and is performed only during certain part of the year”
(International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their
Families, Art. 2(1)). The ILO defines seasonal workers
as “[…] workers who hold explicit or implicit contracts
of employment where the timing and duration of the
contract is significantly influenced by seasonal factors
such as the climatic cycle, public holidays and/or
agricultural harvests” (ILO 1993, para 14(g)).
Social dialogue
Social dialogue includes “all types of negotiation,
consultation and exchange of information among
representatives of workers, employers and governments on common interests in economic, labour and
social policy. Social dialogue is both a means to achieve
social and economic progress and an objective in itself,
as it gives people a voice and stake in their societies
and workplaces. Social dialogue can be bipartite,
between workers and employers or tripartite, including
government” (ILO 2013b, paras 15-16).
Social insurance scheme
A social insurance scheme is a “contributory social
protection scheme that guarantees protection through
an insurance mechanism, based on: (1) prior payment
of contributions (before the occurrence of the insured
contingency); (2) risk- sharing or “pooling”; and (3)
the notion of a guarantee. The contributions paid by
(or for) insured persons are pooled together and the
resulting fund is used to cover the expenses incurred
exclusively by those persons affected by the occurrence
of the relevant (clearly defined) contingency or contingencies. Contrary to commercial insurance, risk-pooling
in social insurance is based on the principle of solidarity
as opposed to individually calculated risk premiums”
(ILO 2017a, p.194).
Social security
Social security “covers all measures providing benefits,
whether in cash or in kind, to secure protection, inter
alia, from: lack of work-related income (or insufficient income) caused by sickness, disability, maternity,
employment injury, unemployment, old age, or death
of a family member; lack of (affordable) access to
healthcare; insufficient family support, particularly for
children and adult dependants; general poverty and
social exclusion” (ILO 2017a, p. 195).
Social protection
Social protection “is defined as the set of policies
and programmes designed to reduce and prevent
poverty, vulnerability and social exclusion throughout
the life cycle. Social protection includes nine main
areas: child and family benefits, maternity protection,

17

unemployment support, employment injury benefits,
sickness benefits, health protection (medical care),
old-age benefits, invalidity/disability benefits, and
survivors’ benefits. Social protection systems address
all these policy areas by a mix of contributory schemes
(social insurance) and non-contributory tax-financed benefits (including social assistance)” (ILO
2017a, p. 194). In most ILO documents, the terms
“social security” and “social protection” are used
interchangeably and encompass a broad variety of
policy instruments, including social insurance, social
assistance, universal benefits and other forms of cash
transfers and measures to ensure effective access to
healthcare and other benefits in kind with a view to
securing social protection.
Social protection floors (SPFs)
Social protection floors are nationally defined sets of
basic social security guarantees that secure protection
aimed at preventing or alleviating poverty, vulnerability
and social exclusion. SPFs should comprise at least the
following basic social security guarantees:
a. access to a nationally defined set of goods
and services constituting essential healthcare,
including maternity care, that meets the criteria
of availability, accessibility, acceptability and
quality;
b. basic income security for children, at least at
a nationally defined minimum level, providing
access to nutrition, education, care and any other
necessary goods and services;
c. basic income security, at least at a nationally
defined minimum level, for persons in active
age who are unable to earn sufficient income,
particularly in cases of sickness, unemployment,
maternity and disability; and
d. basic income security, at least at a nationally
defined minimum level, for older persons.
These guarantees should be provided to at least all
residents and children, as defined in national laws
and regulations and subject to a country’s existing
international obligations (ILO Social Protection Floors
Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202)).
Social transfers
“All social security benefits comprise transfers either
in cash or in kind, i.e. they represent a transfer of
income, goods or services (for example, health-care
services). This transfer may be from the active to
the old, the healthy to the sick, or the affluent to the
poor, among others. The recipients of such transfers
may be in a position to receive them from a specific
social security scheme because they have contributed
to such a scheme (contributory scheme), or because
they are residents (universal schemes for all residents),

or because they fulfil specific age criteria (categorical
schemes), or specific resource conditions (social
assistance schemes), or because they fulfil several
of these conditions at the same time” (ILO 2017a,
196–197).
Temporary migration
Temporary migration takes place when individuals
migrate for a definite period of time, whether for a
short or long period of time. In both cases, the main
feature of this type of migration is the migrants’
eventual return to their home country. According to
the ILO, a temporary migrant is “[a] person of foreign
nationality who enters a country with a visa or who
receives a permit which is either not renewable or only
renewable on a limited basis. Temporary immigrants
are seasonal workers, international students, service
providers, persons on international exchange, etc.”
(ILO 2017a, para. 21).
Totalization
Totalization represents the accumulation of qualifying
periods under different national social security
schemes, so as to allow the aggregation or totalization
of periods of insurance, employment or residence that
may be necessary for the acquisition, maintenance or
recovery of rights and for sharing the costs of benefits
paid. The maintenance of rights in the course of
acquisition is also referred to as ‘totalization’ (Hirose,
Nikač and Tamagno 2011, 9; 83).
Trafficking in persons
Trafficking in persons is defined as “the recruitment,
transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of
persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other
forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception,
of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control
over another person, for the purpose of exploitation”
(Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (Palermo Convention), Art.
3(a)).
Unilateral social protection measures
Unilateral social protection measures are measures
taken by one country, without the cooperation of
another country, with a view to extending social
protection to migrant workers. These measures can be
taken by either the country of origin or the country of
destination in order to palliate the lack of social security
agreements or to ensure more universal and comprehensive social protection coverage of migrant workers.

18

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

19

Introduction

20

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Globalization, technological developments, improved
communication systems and cheaper transportation
not only affect the cross-border movements of goods,
capital and services; they also facilitate migration
between and within regions. The phenomenon
touches nearly all countries of the globe and is increasingly diverse and multifaceted with an estimated 272
million international migrants (UNDESA 2019).
In 2019, about 62 per cent of international migrants
– 169 million, including 99 million men and 70 million
women – were migrant workers (ILO 2021a). In
addition, conflicts, persecution and climate change
are compelling millions of people and families to leave
their communities or countries of origin; 82.4 million
individuals, including 26.4 million refugees and 4.1
million asylum seekers, were forcibly displaced in 2020
(UNHCR 2020).
Crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic have also
had a major impact on the global labour market and
related mobility of workers. Many migrant workers
suffer job losses, unpaid wages, worsening working
and living conditions that have an impact on their
income and remittances, and increasing poverty at the
household level, particularly in countries where they
have no access to social protection.2 As a consequence,
progress towards achievement of the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) has been lost in many
countries (UNDESA 2020).
Although everyone has the right to social security
(Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Art. 22), significant coverage gaps persist. Overall, 53.1 per cent
of the world’s population, including many migrant
workers, lack access to social protection (ILO 2021b).
Migrants are more likely than nationals who work
throughout their life in one country to face legal and
practical obstacles to the exercise of their right to
social security and effective access to social protection
benefits, including healthcare. For example, they may
be denied access to social protection coverage in the
host country because of their status or nationality,
insufficient duration of their periods of employment
and residence, inconsistency between social security
and migration laws or lack of administrative and
financial coordination between the social security
schemes of their home and host countries. Their
access to social protection may also be hindered by a
lack of information about their rights and obligations
and by linguistic and cultural barriers. Women migrant
workers in particular face multiple forms of discrimination when they seek access to social protection and

are at higher risk of exploitation and abuse, including
sexual and gender-based violence.
The importance of extending social protection to all,
including women and men migrant workers, is reflected
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
2018 Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration and the 2018 Global Compact on Refugees as
well as the International Labour Conference Resolution
concerning the second recurrent discussion on social
protection (social security) (ILO 2021c). Under these
international frameworks, States undertake to assist
refugees, asylum seekers, and migrant workers at all
skill levels.
Social security is a basic human right that is enshrined in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) and
is at the heart of the 1944 Declaration of Philadelphia,
an integral part of the ILO Constitution, which seeks to
achieve “the extension of social security measures to
provide basic income to all in need of such protection
and comprehensive medical care” (Art. III(f)). In
fulfilment of this mandate, the ILO has adopted several
Conventions and Recommendations that give effect to
the principle of equal treatment for migrant workers in
respect of social security and promote a rights-based
approach to labour migration.
The need to invest in social protection systems,
including SPFs, has been widely recognized and
endorsed in numerous international and regional
forums.3 The ILO’s Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202) reaffirms the universality of social
protection based on social solidarity, non-discrimination, gender quality and responsiveness to special
needs. It expressly recognizes that “social security is
an investment in people that empowers them to adjust
to changes in the economy and in the labour market,
and (…) social security systems act as automatic social
and economic stabilizers, help stimulate aggregate
demand in times of crisis and beyond, and help
support a transition to a more sustainable economy”
(sixth preambular paragraph).
At the global level, the ILO is taking a leading role in
coordinating the global commitment to building
sustainable social protection systems, including
floors, and efforts in that regard. This commitment is
reflected in many international organizations’ agendas
and in the work of bodies such as the Social Protection
Inter-agency Cooperation Board (SPIAC-B), launched
in 2012 at the request of the Group of 20; the United
Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for

2

For more information on the impact of Covid-19 pandemic on migrant workers see: https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/labour-migration/
WCMS_748791/lang--en/index.htm

3

See the thematic page on the ILO Social Protection Platform for endorsements between 2009 and 2012: http://www.socialprotection.org/
gimi/gess/ShowWiki.ction?wiki.wikiId=1031andlang=EN.

21

Development, established in 2015; and the Global
Partnership for Universal Social Protection (USP2030),
established in 2016, which comprises representatives
of intergovernmental agencies such as the UN, the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
and bilateral partners.
In response to increasing concern for migrant workers’
social protection rights, this Guide seeks to provide
policymakers and practitioners with an overview of

the legal framework and policy options relating to
migrants’ and refugees’ access to social protection.
It also offers practical guidance based on country and
regional practices that may inspire countries when
engaging in legal reforms, negotiating social security
agreements and designing social protection schemes.
These country and regional practices were collected
over several years; however, some recent developments may not be reflected.4

Chapter 1: Rationale for extending social protection to migrant workers and their families

It is essential to ensure that migrant workers benefit from inclusive and equitable access to social protection.
In addition to highlighting the benefits of social protection, this chapter provides an overview of the legal and
practical barriers that prevent them from accessing social protection in countries of origin and destination. An
understanding of these issues and the identification of social protection gaps are useful when designing adapted
policy options. In order to overcome these barriers, a variety of policy options and measures are available to
policymakers. The subsequent chapters of this Guide will highlight relevant country practices.

Chapter 2: Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

UN and ILO Conventions and Recommendations provide a solid international legal framework aimed at
protecting migrant workers’ rights to social protection. Based on the key principles of equality of treatment and
non-discrimination, these instruments provide useful guidance on how to extend social protection coverage
to migrant workers, including by ensuring the portability of social security rights and benefits across borders.
This chapter describes the international and regional instruments that are relevant to migrant workers’ social
protection, the ratification process for ILO standards and the supervisory mechanisms that monitor their
implementation at the national level.

4

For questions or additional information, please contact MIGRANT@ilo.org.

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

22

		

Chapter 3: Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

The conclusion of social security agreements is one of the most commonly used measures for ensuring the
coordination of social security schemes and the portability of social security entitlements and benefits between
countries. While some 660 such instruments are already in place, many migrants remain unprotected and
countries should increase their efforts to broaden the scope of existing agreements and negotiate new ones in
order to better protect migrant workers and their families. The rationale, objectives and key elements of these
agreements and the eight-step process for their negotiation are outlined in this chapter with examples of existing
bilateral, regional and multilateral agreements and institutional, operational and administrative considerations
for their implementation.

		

Chapter 4: Bilateral labour agreements and migrant workers’ social protection

This chapter provides information on bilateral labour agreements (BLAs). These are a useful tool for the
protection of migrant workers, provided that they are consistent with international human rights instruments
and international labour standards. As they seek to regulate labour employment abroad, provisions on the social
protection of migrant workers and references to existing or forthcoming social security agreements should be
included.

		

Chapter 5: Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

Unilateral measures are receiving increased attention from countries of origin and employment with a view to
compensating for the absence of social security agreements or ensuring more universal and comprehensive
social protection of workers. This chapter provides an overview of unilateral measures that policymakers may wish
to consider, including, among others, national policies and legislation that ensure equality of treatment between
migrant workers and nationals, voluntary insurance mechanisms and welfare programmes. Special attention is
drawn to national SPFs as a powerful tool for the extension of universal social protection.

		

Chapter 6: Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

Migrant workers are a heterogeneous group. Their migration status, type of employment contract, duration of stay
and various other characteristics influence their access to social protection and should be taken into account when
developing and implementing policies and mechanisms aimed at extending social protection. The objective of this
chapter is to identify the specific obstacles, international legal framework and policy options that are relevant to
migrant domestic workers, migrant seasonal agricultural workers and migrant workers in an irregular situation,
who make up a significant proportion of all migrant workers and face particular difficulties in accessing social
protection. This chapter also stresses the importance of ensuring that labour and social security laws take these
workers into account and of adapting social protection measures to their unique characteristics and needs.

23

		

Chapter 7: Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

This chapter emphasizes the importance of extending social protection coverage to refugees and asylum
seekers, who face barriers to social protection owing to their often-temporary legal status, unpredictable length
of stay, limited history of contributions, lack of social protection from their countries of origin and limited or
no access to the formal labour market. The integration of refugees into national social protection systems,
including contributory and non-contributory schemes, should take these specificities into account and be based
on the principle of equality of treatment. Strengthening social protection systems benefits both refugees and
host communities, provides sustainable, cost-effective solutions for moving out of humanitarian assistance and
fosters social cohesion.

		

Chapter 8: Gender, social protection and labour migration

Migration is affected by gender norms and expectations, power relations and unequal rights, which, taken together,
shape the migration options and experiences not only of women and girls, but also of men and boys. How these
experiences differ, their consequences for social protection coverage and the existing policy options for addressing
gender-specific vulnerabilities and inequalities are explained in this final chapter of the Guide.
Each chapter can be read on a stand-alone basis and may be used in the development of training modules, including
pedagogical tools and exercises. The conclusion summarizes the various policy options and issues a call for action.

24

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Chapter 1
Rationale for extending social protection to migrant workers and their families

Chapter 1
Rationale for extending social protection to
migrant workers and their families

25

26

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Key messages
► Social security is a human right which migrant workers should enjoy throughout the migration cycle.
► Extending social protection to all, including migrant workers and their families, is key to ensuring income
security for all, reducing poverty and inequality, achieving decent working conditions and reducing vulnerability
and social exclusion.
► The underlying causes of the main challenges and obstacles faced by migrants in their effort to access social
protection can be traced back to the principle of nationality and territoriality.
► An understanding of the legal and practical barriers that migrant workers face is essential to the identification
of appropriate policies, laws and measures.
► Overcoming the difficulties faced by migrant workers and their families when seeking social protection is a
major challenge for countries, but a wide range of options exist. These include ratification and application of
the relevant ILO instruments, including with regard to the principle of equality of treatment; the signing of
bilateral and multilateral social security agreements; the adoption of unilateral measures, such as coverage
of migrant workers under national social security legislation; and complementary measures addressing the
practical obstacles that these workers face.
► The consistency of migration, employment and social protection policies, laws and strategies is essential if
migrant workers are to have effective access to social protection benefits.
► The social partners should be actively involved in planning, designing and monitoring social protection
extension strategies, including for migrant workers.

Chapter 1
Rationale for extending social protection to migrant workers and their families

► 1.1 Introduction
In recent decades, the prevalence of migration has
increased substantially worldwide. Globalization,
technological developments, improved communication systems and cheaper transportation not only
affect the cross-border movements of goods, capital
and services; they also facilitate migration between
and within regions. In addition, conflicts, persecution
and climate change are compelling millions of persons
and families to leave their communities or countries of
origin (UNDESA 2017).
While international migrants comprised only 2 per cent
of the global population in 2000, their numbers had
increased to 3.5 per cent – an estimated 272 million–
by 2019 (UNDESA 2019). In 2019, about 62 per cent
of international migrants (169 million) were migrant
workers, a 12.7 per cent increase as compared to 2013.
(ILO 2021a).
Approximately 69.4 per cent of the working-age
population has no or only partial access to comprehensive social protection systems (ILO 2021b). While
most developed countries have laws and regulations
that protect the rights of migrant workers, especially
with regard to social protection, many do not. As such,
although migration is widely recognized as “a source of
prosperity, innovation and sustainable development”
(UN 2018, para. 8), inclusive measures are needed to
address the specific obstacles that migrant workers
face in the effort to access their right to social
protection. These obstacles include both the loss of
benefit entitlement in their countries of origin and the
restrictive conditions imposed by the host country’s
system. In a worst-case scenario, these workers may
be required to contribute to both their home and their
host country’s system without reaping the benefits of
either.
As social protection measures are both a social and an
economic necessity, these obstacles and restrictions
must be addressed. By extending social protection
coverage to migrant workers and their families,
governments not only mitigate poverty, inequality,
vulnerability and insecurity across an individual’s
life cycle; they also ensure political stability, social
cohesion and enjoyment of the right to social security.
This can be achieved through a number of policy
actions, including, among other things, the ratification
and implementation of the relevant ILO Conventions
and Recommendations, establishment of bilateral or
multilateral social security agreements and adoption
of unilateral measures.

In light of the foregoing, the objective of this chapter is
to highlight the benefits of extending social protection
to migrant workers and their families and to identify the
many legal and practical obstacles and restrictions that
they face in the effort to access social protection in their
countries of origin, transit and destination. The chapter
concludes with an overview of the main policy options
for enhancing migrant workers’ social protection, to be
further detailed in subsequent chapters.

►1.2 Why extend social protection
to migrant workers and their
families?
Extending social protection to all, including migrant
workers and their families, is key to ensuring income
security for all, reducing poverty and inequality,
achieving decent working conditions and reducing
vulnerability and social exclusion. It has been widely
recognized that social protection promotes inclusive
growth and sustainable development, as reflected in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (ILO
2017a, p. 6).
A strong argument in favour of extending social
protection to migrant workers and members of their
family is made in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, adopted by the United Nations General
Assembly in 1948, which states that “[e]veryone, as
a member of society, has the right to social security”
(Art. 22) and “…to a standard of living adequate for
the health and well-being of himself and of his family,
including food, clothing, housing and medical care
and necessary social services and the right to security
in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability,
widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control” (Art. 25). The right to social
security is also enshrined in the International Covenant
on Social, Economic and Cultural Rights (1966), other
international and regional human rights instruments
and national constitutions. Several ILO Conventions
and Recommendations include provisions on the
labour and social protection rights of migrant workers.
The role that decent work, including social protection,
and orderly, safe and responsible migration can play
in achieving sustainable development is reflected in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (ILO
2017a), Goals 1.3, 3.8, 5.4, 8.5, 8.8, 10.4 and 10.7, which
emphasize that no one should be left behind.
The aforementioned laws, rights and frameworks
laid the foundation for the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration, which has been called
“a milestone in the history of the global dialogue

27

28

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

and international cooperation on migration”. While
not legally binding, the Compact fosters cooperation among the relevant migration stakeholders
and “upholds the sovereignty of States and their
obligations under international law” (UN 2018, p.2). It
includes provisions on social protection, which build
on the principles of non-discrimination and equality
of treatment. It also sets out a purpose, a common
understanding and a responsibility for States to
facilitate access to services, ensure the portability of
benefits and conclude reciprocal bilateral/multilateral
social security agreements for migrant workers of all
skill levels.

Many other arguments with regard to various areas
of the economy can also support the extension of
social protection to migrant workers and their families.
These workers can fill labour shortages, particularly in
economies with ageing workforces, and can improve
the demographics of a country’s labour force and the
sustainability of its social security system. Extending
social protection coverage to migrant workers can
facilitate the formalization of the labour market and the
regularization of migrant workers. Conversely, formalization and regularization also facilitate the extension
of social protection to migrant workers, which in turn
gives them an incentive to work in the formal economy.

Social protection is also a social and economic
necessity. Solid national social protection systems act
as automatic social and economic stabilizers at the
macro, household and individual levels. They smooth
household income and domestic consumption,
stimulate aggregate demand, inject cash into local
markets in times of crisis and beyond, and support the
transition to a more sustainable economy by building
up people’s capabilities and productivity through
investment in, among other things, health, education
and employment. Their positive impact on preventing
households from falling further into poverty and their
redistributive effect on incomes, and consequently on
economic inequality, builds social cohesion, reduces
political instability and promotes equitable societal
progress in the long term as a matter of social justice.

Allowing migrants to join social insurance schemes
helps to build stronger and financially healthier social
security systems by growing the tax base, spreading
risk across a larger pool of members and enhancing
the financial sustainability of these schemes since
migrant workers are often net contributors over their
lifetime. It also reduces pressure on tax-funded social
protection mechanisms in countries of destination, or
in their countries of origin upon their return.

At the individual level, the extension of such protection
acknowledges that migrant workers, like everyone
else, can face contingencies with significant financial
consequences. These risks can occur in any of the nine
main branches or areas of social protection: “child and
family benefits, maternity protection, unemployment
support, employment injury benefits, sickness benefits,
health protection (medical care), old-age benefits,
invalidity/disability benefits, and survivors’ benefits”.
(Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention, 1952
(No. 102); ILO 2017a, p.2). They may be more serious or
more likely to occur in the case of migrant workers than
for nationals who spend their entire life in one country.
For example, migrant workers may be employed in
dangerous working conditions and weaker workplace
protections such as in agriculture, construction, fishing
and mining and may thus be at higher risk of suffering
a serious occupational injury (Orrenius and Zavodny
2012; Pérez et al. 2012; Takala et al. 2014; Preibisch and
Otero 2014). The provision of social protection through
benefits in any of the aforementioned areas, whether
in cash or in kind, can be used to secure protection
from the economic and social distress caused by such
contingencies.

In addition, increasing migrants’ access to health
protection systems plays a critical role in enhancing
labour productivity by improving or maintaining
workers’ health and raising public health indicators.
Indeed, the higher the health status of workers, the
lower the costs of social assistance for the State, among
other benefits. Robust, universal healthcare coverage
with preventive policies is particularly important to the
health status of nationals and migrants. Furthermore,
the inclusion of migrant workers in social security
schemes and the option to maintain their rights if they
decide to move to another country or return home
can facilitate labour mobility, including return and
reintegration, and attract the skilled migrant workers
needed for the proper functioning of integrated labour
markets. Including migrant workers in social protection
creates a level playing field with other workers by
reducing unfair competition and the perverse incentive
to recruit migrant workers as cheap and unprotected
labour, potentially avoiding a race to the bottom (ILO
2017b).
Thus, extending social protection to all – including
migrants – has a positive impact on individuals and
families, communities and local markets, as well as on
countries’ development, social cohesion and stability
at the subregional level.

Chapter 1
Rationale for extending social protection to migrant workers and their families

► Box 1.1 The impact of COVID-19 on migrant workers and the importance of social protection
The need to extend social protection to migrant workers, irrespective of their status, has been underlined
across the world by the COVID-19 pandemic. Not only does the virus affect migrants’ health; it also has an
impact on their socio-economic status, owing to the loss of jobs and closure of businesses, and on society as
a whole, owing to higher levels of exposure and spread. These risks are heightened by the fact that many of
them work in the sectors hardest hit by the crisis (such as domestic work and hospitality) or entail heightened
health risks owing to their provision of essential goods and services to the general population (agriculture,
agro-food processing and healthcare). Despite wide recognition of migrant workers’ contribution to countries’
social and economic development, many are not accorded equality of treatment with national workers even
in times of crisis.
Instead, they face challenges that keep them from accessing social protection, including healthcare and
income security, and have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic:
► Migrant workers, and particularly front-line workers such as those in the health and care sectors (many
of them women), face health-related risks; they may be more vulnerable to contracting the virus and,
once infected, they face challenges in access to healthcare owing to the cost or to their immigration or
employment status. They often lack access to social protection, including sickness benefits and paid sick
leave, and their socio-economic situation may compel them to work while sick, jeopardizing their own
health and that of their co-workers. In addition, low- and medium-skilled migrant workers often live in overcrowded environments, increasing the probability of COVID-19 contagion.
► In view of the socio-economic impact of COVID-19 on national economies, migrant workers may be among
the first to lose their jobs and those who continue to work may experience wage cuts, non-payment of
wages and deteriorating working conditions. This has a negative impact on the income of migrant families
and leaves many migrant workers without access to employment-based social protection. For workers in
the informal economy, who are already excluded from social security systems, the pandemic has increased
the struggle to meet their basic survival needs. Their potentially irregular status, together with discrimination and stigmatization, may also hinder their access to COVID-19 response measures.

These challenges have exemplified the urgent need to extend comprehensive social protection to migrant
workers, irrespective of their status, especially during crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic. To that end,
various short-term mechanisms should be implemented. These include adopting unilateral measures, ensuring
access to quality healthcare and benefits such as paid sick leave, providing income support through cash and
in-kind transfers, and facilitating access to adequate information regarding the protection, prevention and
treatment of COVID-19 and on their right to social protection.
In addition to these measures, countries must consider medium- to long-term policy responses in order to
build a more inclusive social protection system that allows for better and more sustainable protection of
migrants and their families in the future. These include the ratification and implementation of international
standards; the development of national social protection strategies, policies and legal frameworks that are
inclusive of migrant workers and their families; the extension of social protection to migrant workers in the
informal economy or with irregular status; the conclusion of bilateral/multilateral social security or labour
agreements; and the mobilization of fiscal resources for social protection.
Source: ILO 2020a, ILO 2020b

29

30

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

►1.3 What are the legal
restrictions and practical barriers?
Migrant workers, as compared to nationals who
have lived and worked in the same country for their
entire life, face major challenges in accessing their
social protection rights. The underlying causes can be
traced back to the principle of nationality and territoriality. An understanding of the barriers and obstacles
that these workers face is essential to the identification and development of appropriate solutions and
measures.5 To that end, the barriers can be divided into
two categories: legal relating to the legal framework of
the host or origin country, and practical, arising in the
effective enjoyment of their rights.
Addressing legal restrictions requires structural
change and political will at both the national and
the international level.6 At the same time, practical
barriers must be addressed through administrative
and political reforms aimed at facilitating migrants’
access to social protection, such as the simplification
of administrative procedures; adoption of measures or
mechanisms that enhance effective outreach in terms
of registration, collection of contributions, delivery of
benefits and monitoring; free legal and social services
and assistance; anti-discrimination campaigns and
policies; measures aimed at facilitating access to
financial services; awareness-raising campaigns;
and dissemination of information in the relevant
languages. The options for addressing these obstacles
and extending social protection to migrant workers will
be described in further detail in Chapters 3, 4 and 5.

1.3.1 The underlying causes
As mentioned previously, the root causes of migrants’
challenges in terms of access to social protection,
including healthcare, are primarily associated with
a migrant’s country of origin and the relationship
between that country and the country of destination.
The extent to which these two dimensions interact can
be demonstrated through two principles: territoriality
and nationality (Hirose, Nikač and Tamagno 2011).

The principle of territoriality restricts the application
of national legislation, including social security
legislation, to the territory of the State in which it
was enacted. It is a reflection of a State’s sovereignty
over its own territory and limits interference from
other States. This has practical and administrative
consequences for the State’s ability to verify, monitor
and gather information or payments from migrant
workers residing in the territory of another State
unless both States are parties to a cooperation
agreement. As a consequence, migrant workers may
face loss of coverage under the social protection
scheme of their home country when accepting work in
the destination country. The territorial nature of social
security may also result in limitations on the portability7
of benefits earned abroad when migrants leave the
territory of a State in which they have acquired rights.
The principle of territoriality also underpins national
legislation on the admission and entry to and stay
of migrant workers in a country. While the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights states that “everyone has
the right to leave any country, including his own, and
to return to his country” (Art. 13), States may limit the
right to enter into or stay in their territory. Policies and
legislation in that regard, and the manner in which they
are implemented, can result in the selective application
of social security rights to certain persons, depending
on their migratory status and on the contributory and
residence requirements of the scheme (Sojka and
Carmel 2017).
The principle of nationality can affect migrants’ social
security rights in destination countries by excluding
or limiting their access to benefits because of their
nationality. While a number of countries recognize the
principle of non-discrimination on the basis of nationality and have provisions on equality of treatment with
respect to social security between national and non-national workers in their national legislation (see Chapter
2 and 3 for examples), in others the principle of nationality results in non-national workers being accorded
less favourable treatment than national workers under
the social security laws.

5

This can be done using the methodology described in ILO 2017c.

6

This may entail legal reforms, changes in legislation, structural changes in the functioning of institutions (their internal regulations) or
negotiation of a new bilateral/multilateral social security agreement and other agreements/conventions on freedom of movement and
economic areas/zones.

7

For definitions of the term “portability”; see Box 3.4.

Chapter 1
Rationale for extending social protection to migrant workers and their families

1.3.2 Legal restrictions on migrant
workers’ access to social protection
benefits
The following is a non-exhaustive list of barriers arising
from institutional and legal frameworks:
► National legislation may expressly exclude
foreign nationals, temporary migrants or
migrants on specific visas or residence permits
or establish less favourable conditions for non-national workers under social protection schemes.8
For example, foreign nationals or temporary residents (including refugees and asylum seekers)
and/or their dependants may be prohibited from
applying for a work permit and gaining access
to the formal labour market and to employment-based social protection schemes. Migrant
workers may also be legally excluded from social
security schemes because they cannot or do not
fulfil some of the conditions, including minimum
duration of employment or residence or minimum
number of contributory years. Indeed, the duration
of stay or the temporary nature of migration (as
in the case of seasonal or temporary workers) can
deny migrants access to certain short-term (such
as unemployment) or long-term (such as pension)
benefits. Though migrants often contribute to
these schemes, the eligibility criteria may not
allow them to benefit from them. For instance, in
Singapore, only permanent residents are eligible
for contributory social protection benefits. This
inequality of treatment or legal exclusion can be
traced back to the principle of nationality that is
still prevalent in a number of countries around the
world (Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017).
► Certain categories of workers, such as domestic,
self-employed and agricultural workers, may also
be legally excluded from social protection. This is
quite common in the case of domestic workers (for
example, in Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand). In
such cases, both national and migrant domestic
workers are excluded from social protection.
► Social security laws and agreements do not usually
cover migrants with irregular status. These
workers may have entered the country of destination in an irregular manner; they may have

entered on a regular basis but their status may
have become irregular owing to their employment
situation (such as expiration of their residence or
work permit); or they may not meet the application
or renewal requirements for certain types of residence or work permit (for example, an individual
on a student permit who is not eligible to apply
for a work permit), This inability to meet the application or renewal requirements for a residence
or work permit often prevents migrants from
accessing social protection benefits.9
► Similarly, migrants who work in the informal
economy, whether they are in a regular or an
irregular situation, are often legally excluded
from social protection schemes such as contributory social insurance. Migrant workers are often
concentrated in low-skilled jobs, particularly in
the agriculture, construction and domestic work
sectors. These occupations are often temporary
or seasonal and may not be covered by labour
legislation and labour inspections. In addition, the
capacity of labour inspectorates may be limited,
both legally and in terms of resources. This is a
significant constraint in many countries with a high
proportion of workers in the informal economy;
for example, according to the ILO (2018a), the
percentage of informal employment is 85.8 per
cent in Africa, 68.6 per cent in the Arab States and
68.2 per cent in Asia and the Pacific. The lowest
percentages are in the Americas and Europe
(40 per cent) and Central Asia (25.1 per cent).
According to the ILO, the Covid-19 pandemic,
including lockdown and restrictions on movement
and its socioeconomic consequences have particularly affected migrant workers in the informal
economy (ILO 2020b).
► Lack of social security coordination owing to the
absence of bilateral or multilateral agreements10
may prevent migrant workers from maintaining
social security rights that are acquired or in the
course of acquisition when moving from one
country to another. Moreover, even where these
agreements exist, they may cover only certain
branches of social security or categories of migrant
workers or may not provide for the portability of
social security rights or otherwise facilitate the
enjoyment of migrants’ right to social protection.11

8

An ILO mapping of 120 countries reveals that only 58 and 62 per cent of countries’ national laws provide for equality of treatment
between nationals and non-nationals with regard to contributory social security and healthcare, respectively (see van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul
and Binette 2017).

9

For further information on access to social security by migrant workers in an irregular situation, see ILO Forthcoming.

10

The differences between social security systems (e.g. social insurance versus provident funds) poses an additional challenge to the
negotiation of social security agreements.

11

Not all of the basic social security principles may be covered by an agreement; see Chapter 2.

31

32

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

In other cases, agreements may not yet have
entered into force or may not be enforced in
practice for a variety of reasons, including limited
institutional capacities, lack of training and information on the content of the agreement and how
to implement it or lack of data and information
exchange.
► Lack of effective enforcement and implementation of social security laws and bilateral or multilateral social security agreements may allow a
country’s discriminatory practices to persist with
impunity. To support effective implementation of
the relevant legal provisions, the social security
administration and institutions, the judiciary, the
labour inspectorate, social workers and other
relevant stakeholders must have adequate institutional capacities, be well trained and have sufficient
resources to fulfil their role and responsibilities.
Cooperation between the labour inspectorate and
the immigration authorities should proceed with
caution, bearing in mind that the main objective
of the labour inspection system is not to enforce
the immigration laws but to protect the rights and
interests of all workers and improve their working
conditions (see ILO 2016, para. 482).

1.3.3 Practical barriers to migrant
workers’ access to social protection
benefits
As described above, even in situations where migrants
are legally entitled to social protection, it may not
materialize for several reasons, including but not
limited to:
► Lack of social protection programmes or
schemes. Not all countries have programmes
or schemes for all social security branches. This
is a major barrier for migrant workers as the
progressive development of social protection
through policies or laws may prioritize coverage

of nationals over non-nationals. In addition,
social security agreements generally cover only
the branches existing in States parties to the
agreement.
► Lack of information or knowledge of migrants’
rights and the administrative procedures for their
exercise. Remoteness or isolation of the workplace
and home, irregular status, language barriers,
discrimination in access to information and illiteracy are additional factors that can prevent
migrant workers from receiving adequate information on their entitlements. Lack of information
can also lead to asymmetry in negotiations
between workers and employers, placing these
workers in a disadvantage when advocating for
their rights.
► Administrative procedures can be complex and
time-consuming for both migrant workers and
employers. Indeed, various supporting documents can be required for registration, payment
of contributions, receipt of payments and requests
for reimbursement. Employers in small and medium-sized enterprises and self-employed workers
are often required to follow the same procedures as larger enterprises. Moreover, for illiterate
migrant workers and those with limited administrative skills, even relatively simple procedures can
present an insurmountable challenge. Complex
and lengthy administrative procedures also have
an impact on the rapidity and efficiency of the
delivery of protection by social security administrations. Absent or limited information technology (IT) systems further complicate the administration of and inter-operability among schemes
and programmes.
► Lack of contributory capacity and other
financial challenges. Limited capacity to
contribute to social security schemes often results
in the exclusion from coverage of certain groups,
such as migrant domestic workers. Appropriate

► Box 1.2. Links to country examples
ILO study: Social Protection for Migrant Workers in ASEAN: Developments, Challenges and Prospects
ITC training modules on extending social protection to migrant workers in the ECOWAS region implementation of the General Convention on Social Security

Chapter 1
Rationale for extending social protection to migrant workers and their families

and carefully designed schemes can take different
levels of contributory capacity into account and
provide lower or subsidized benefits for groups
with lower capacity. In addition, short-term (such
as occupational injury, maternity and sickness)
benefits may be easier to access for migrant
workers than long-term (such as old-age pension)
benefits as they depend on the current contributory
capacity of the member. For pension benefits,
contribution conditions may be more difficult
to meet as they require a certain contributory
capacity over longer periods of time (ILO 2017a).
Migrants may also face difficulties under certain
healthcare schemes where advance payment (also
referred to as out-of-pocket payment) is required.
► Lack of trust. Migrant workers as well as their
employers may want to avoid paying social security
contributions if they believe they cannot expect
benefits in return whether real or perceived. This
perception might be based on misconceptions,
lack of information and/or bad communication,
but it can also be based on poor or limited trust in
the system or the institutions.
► Language barriers. Where information on a social
protection scheme or programme is not provided,
or legal or social services and assistance are not
available, in a language that migrants understand,
they are intentionally or unintentionally excluded
from access to social protection.
► Limited fiscal space or investment in social
protection can also restrict access to such
protection for migrant workers. Limited fiscal
space, which may be an issue in any country and
is particularly common in low-income countries,
translates into a lack of or limited investment in
social protection benefits, social security administrations, well-trained social security staff and
effective delivery mechanisms. Failure to invest
in social protection, pervasive poverty and the
absence of decent work opportunities may also
influence migrant workers’ decision to leave their
country in search of a better future and income
security for their families and themselves. On the
other hand, investment in social protection raises
household consumption and aggregate demand
and contributes to a country’s economic growth
(ILO 2017a).
► Separation of family members across countries or where the breadwinner lives in a different
country than his or her dependents can be a
major obstacle for a migrant’s family members.
Dependents who remain in the home country
may lose coverage because the absent breadwinner can no longer contribute to the national
social protection system. In these situations,

migrant workers’ remittances are often used to
cover the healthcare expenses of family members
back home.
► Lack of representation, organization and
effective social dialogue as a result of legal
restrictions on migrant workers’ fundamental
right to freedom of association and collective
bargaining can have significant repercussions
for their social protection. Failure to effectively
consult these workers, together with workers’ and
employers’ organizations, at the development,
implementation and monitoring stages may lead
to the adoption of laws, policies and schemes
that do not meet their needs and create tension
between nationals and non-nationals. Social
dialogue and greater representation of migrant
workers can help build stronger social cohesion
and consensus on their social protection, ensure
more sustainable extension strategies and ensure
the buy-in of potential beneficiaries. Conversely,
lack of representation can have a negative impact
on their access to information, support and assistance and on their ability to follow complex procedures, overcome language barriers and use justice
and complaint mechanisms. Workers’ organizations can play a crucial role in ensuring better
working conditions, including social security
coverage, by providing information about workers’
rights and obligations and other services, such as
legal advice. They also negotiate collective agreements and monitor their implementation and can
help migrant workers to resolve disputes with
employers informally (Fudge and Hobden 2018).
► Geographical barriers can make it difficult and
costly for migrant workers to register and obtain
information, particularly where social security
offices are far from the enterprise, workplace or
home. In many countries, these offices are not
available in rural and remote areas and transport
to the nearest office may be unavailable or
expensive.
► Access to justice (or judicial protection) can be
difficult for migrant workers, irrespective of their
status, owing to a lack of knowledge, means and
support. Legal redress, including complaint procedures and mechanisms, should be available to
these workers and labour inspectors should have
a legal mandate that allows them to fulfil their
mandate effectively. The length and cost of legal
proceedings are another significant obstacle. High
fees can dissuade migrant workers from bringing
complaints while those with irregular residence
status may be legally excluded from judicial
protection or be unable to exercise their right to
bring legal proceedings for fear – founded or not

33

34

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

– of expulsion. Migrant workers may not be given
sufficient time to pursue complaints and obtain
redress, including with regard to social security
rights, before returning home and may thus find it
even more difficult to gain access to justice and to
file claims in the former host country.
► Gender discrimination and religious and
cultural barriers can significantly hinder the
extension of social protection to migrant workers
and their families. For example, in certain societies,
women have limited access to the labour market
for cultural, customary and/or religious reasons
and are thus excluded from employment-based
social protection schemes. Lack of recognition
of certain jobs, such as care and domestic work,
as employment can also lead to exclusion from
employment-based social protection coverage.
In some countries, guardians other than the
birth mother – including, for example, the father,
adoptive parents and non-biological LGBTI parents
– are precluded from accessing parental, paternity
and or maternity leave and benefits.
► Discrimination and stereotypes can also affect
migrants’ access to social protection; for example,
they may be required to pay higher registration
fees than nationals and to provide additional documentation. Discrimination may occur at any stage
in either the country of origin or the host country:
when information on the scheme’s existence is
provided during the registration process, when
contributions are collected, when benefits are
paid or when workers seek access to complaint or
redress mechanisms.
► Lack of data on migrant workers’ coverage under
social protection schemes can affect national social
protection and migration strategies and policies.
Accurate, reliable data on migrant workers’ social
protection coverage in and across countries is
critical in order to identify protection gaps, inform
policies on the expansion of coverage, improve the
effectiveness of national social protection systems,
support the administration and delivery of benefits
and monitor progress towards the achievement of
SDG Indicator 1.3.1 on social protection floors.
The obstacles or barriers faced by migrant workers are
likely to be more acute and prevalent depending on
migration pattern12 or geographical location. Workers
who migrate between developing countries usually
have very limited access to social security benefits
because these countries’ social protection schemes
are often limited in scope and coverage and because

12

a large share of the migration takes place outside of
any legal framework, whereas those who migrate to
high-income countries and meet the social security
scheme’s eligibility requirements in the country of
employment can generally access the services and
benefits of more developed systems. However, the
coordination of social security schemes or lack thereof
between countries of origin and destination can make
it difficult for even these workers to benefit from certain
social security entitlements (such as pension benefits)
when they return to their country of origin.
The lack of coherence between migration, employment
and social protection laws, policies and strategies can
also create significant obstacles to migrant workers’
access to social protection. While migration policies
may promote the migration of certain categories of
workers, such as domestic workers, these workers
may be excluded from social protection laws. A
whole-of-government approach and political will are
crucial to the development and implementation of any
policy or measure concerning the extension of social
protection to migrant workers, refugees and their
families.

►1.4 What are the policy options
for extending social protection
to migrant workers and their
families? The ILO’s approach
States should establish, strengthen or extend comprehensive, adequate, sustainable, rights-based and
gender responsive social protection systems for all
workers including migrant workers. In order to address
the various obstacles faced by migrants in accessing
healthcare and other social protection benefits, States
may opt for a number of policy options, which are not
mutually exclusive and will be discussed in further
detail in subsequent chapters:
1. ratification and implementation of the relevant
ILO Conventions and Recommendations as a first
step towards incorporation of the principles and
standards established therein into domestic law.
For more information, see Chapter 2;
2. conclusion and enforcement of bilateral/multilateral agreements on social security coordination. The
content and scope of these agreements, the negotiation process, and country and regional practices
are described below. For more information, see
Chapter 3;

This refers to the demographics and skill composition of migrant workers.

Chapter 1
Rationale for extending social protection to migrant workers and their families

3. inclusion of social security provisions in bilateral
labour agreements (BLAs) and memoranda of
understanding (MoUs). For more information, see
Chapter 4;
4. adoption of unilateral measures, including equality
of treatment and national SPFs, in order to extend
social protection to migrant workers and their
families. For more information, see Chapter 5;
5. complementary measures addressing the administrative, practical and organizational obstacles faced
by migrant workers. For more information, see
Chapter 5.
The social partners should be actively involved in the
planning, design, implementation and monitoring
of these policy options.13 Social dialogue and consultation “can permit to identify gaps in migration and
social security policies in sending, transit and receiving
countries and supports the consideration of the
specific needs of migrant workers and their families,
which is key for the design of migrant-sensitive policies
and measures. Their involvement also contributes to
ensuring political buy-in and broader public support
and acceptance. Workers’ organizations can also
contribute to address lack of information of migrant
workers through sensitization of their members as well
as training and vocational guidance” (Van Panhuys,
Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017).
In addition to or in the absence of the foregoing,
migrants may consider:
6. private or community-based measures (such as
private insurance or health mutuals). For more
information, see Chapter 5.

13

When deciding on policy options for extending social
protection, it is important to take into account the
specificities and needs of different groups (including
migrant domestic workers, migrant seasonal agricultural workers, migrants in an irregular situation,
refugees and asylum seekers, seafarers, posted
workers and frontier workers) and to prioritize or
adapt the various policy options accordingly. For more
information on migrant domestic workers, migrant
seasonal agricultural workers and migrants in an
irregular situation, see Chapter 6; for more information
on refugees and asylum seekers, see Chapter 7.
Gender also shapes the migration experience. It may
pose additional challenges for specific categories
of migrants and requires the development of
gender-responsive strategies and schemes. For more
information, see Chapter 8.

►1.5 Conclusion
As shown in this chapter, the extension of social
protection to migrants and their families can be
life-changing. Not only does it provide income security
and decent standards of living and employment for
individuals; it also reduces poverty and inequality,
promotes sustainable development and inclusive
growth and improves social cohesion and justice for
countries. To that end, governments should design
and implement policies that adhere to international
standards and instruments while addressing the
underlying challenges and restrictions faced by many
migrants around the globe. The fact that millions of
these individuals are denied access to such services
and programmes shows that more needs to be done
in designing and implementing nationally appropriate
social protections systems for all as outlined in the
SDGs. As argued by the ILO (2017a), the lack of such
efforts not only results in high political costs for governments but also harms development efforts and, most
importantly, contradicts democratic values.

According to the ILO’s Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202), such extension strategies should: “(a) prioritize the
implementation of social protection floors as a starting point for countries that do not have a minimum level of social security guarantees,
and as a fundamental element of their national social security systems; and (b) seek to provide higher levels of protection to as many
people as possible, reflecting economic and fiscal capacities of Members, and as soon as possible” (para. 13(1)).

35

36

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Box 1.3 ILO action
The ILO is mandated to support the extension of social protection to all who require it, including
migrants, and provides technical assistance with its constituents’ extension strategies.
The ILO provides technical advice/expertise and capacity-building on:
► the ratification and implementation of ILO Conventions and Recommendations;
► the drafting and negotiation of social security agreements;
► the establishment of comprehensive social protection systems, including national social protection
floors, based on social dialogue;
► the drafting or revision of labour migration policies and laws;
► the drafting and negotiation of bilateral labour arrangements and MoUs with provisions on social
security;
► the formulation of national social protection policies and legal frameworks that extend coverage to
migrant workers (including those in the informal economy) and their dependents in line with international standards and good practices;
► the development, strengthening, implementation and monitoring of new or existing rights-based
social protection schemes or mechanisms that enhance access or extend coverage to migrant
workers (for example, by providing access to healthcare and income security);
► the establishment of a knowledge base (including statistics) on social security for migrant workers to
support evidence-based policymaking and capacity-building;
► the costing and financing of social protection schemes and reforms (such as fiscal space analyses),
including those related to the extension of social protection to migrant workers and their families;
► the financial governance of social protection schemes and programmes.

Chapter 1
Rationale for extending social protection to migrant workers and their families

► Bibliography
Avato, Johanna, Johannes Koettl and Rachel Sabates-Wheeler. 2009. Definitions, Good Practices, and
Global Estimates on the Status of Social Protection for International Migrants. World Bank.
CMW (UN Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
their Families). 2013. General Comment No. 2 on the Rights of Migrant Workers in an Irregular
Situation and Members of their Families.
EU (European Union). 1996. Directive 96/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
16 December 1996 concerning the posting of workers in the framework of the provision of
services.
Hirose, Kenichi, Milos Nikač and Edward Tamagno. 2011. Social Security for Migrant Workers: A Rightsbased Approach. Geneva: ILO.
ICLS (International Conference of Labour Statisticians). 2018. Guidelines concerning Statistics of
International Labour Migration. ILO.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2013a. Extension of Social Protection of Migrant Domestic
Workers in Europe.
–––. 2013b. Social Dialogue: Recurrent discussion under the ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a
Fair Globalization. ILC.102/VI.
–––. 2017a. World Social Protection Report 2017–19: Universal Social Protection to Achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals.
–––. 2017b. “Universal and Sustainable Social Security Systems”, paper presented at the Brazil,
Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) Employment Working Group Meeting, Yunnan,
19–20 April 2017 (unpublished).
–––.2017c. Social Protection Assessment-based National Dialogue: A Global Guide. https://www.ilo.org/
global/topics/dw4sd/WCMS_568693/lang--en/index.htm.
–––. 2018a. Women and Men in the Informal Economy: A Statistical Picture.
–––. 2019. General Survey concerning the Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202),
ILC.108/III(B).
–––. 2020a. Social Protection for Migrant Workers: A Necessary Response to the COVID-19 Crisis. https://
www.ilo.org/secsoc/information-resources/publications-and-tools/Brochures/WCMS_748979/
lang--en/index.htm.
–––. 2020b. Extending Social Protection to Informal Workers in the COVID-19 Crisis: Country Responses
and Policy Considerations. Social Protection Spotlight. https://www.social-protection.org/gimi/
RessourcePDF.action?id=56833.

37

38

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

–––. 2021a. ILO Global Estimates on International Migrant Workers - Results and Methodology – Third
edition.
–––. 2021b. World Social Protection Report 2020–22: Social protection at the crossroads ‒ in pursuit of
a better future.
–––. 2021c. Resolution Concerning the Second Recurrent Discussion on Social Protection (social security).
ILC. 109/Resolution III. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---relconf/
documents/meetingdocument/wcms_806099.pdf.
–––. Forthcoming. Compendium of good practice for addressing irregular labour migration and
protecting migrant workers in irregular situations.
Kulke, Ursula. 2006. Filling the Gap of Social Security for Migrant Workers: ILO’s Strategy. Geneva: ILO.
OHCHR (Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights). 2004. Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement.
Orrenius, Pia M. and Madeline Zavodny. 2012. “Immigrants in Risky Occupations”. Bonn: IZA.
Pérez, Elena Ronda, Fernando Benavides, Katia Levecque, John Love, Emily Felt and Ronan Van
Rossem. 2012. “Differences in Working Conditions and Employment Arrangements among
Migrant and Non-migrant Workers in Europe”. Ethnicity and Health 17(6): 563–77.
Preibisch, Kerry and Gerardo Otero. 2014. “Does Citizenship Status Matter in Canadian Agriculture?
Workplace Health and Safety for Migrant and Immigrant Laborers”. Rural Sociology 79(2): 174–
99.
Sojka, Bozena and Emma Carmel. 2017. “The Human Rights-Based Approach to Social Protection
for Migrants: tensions and contradictions in practice”. UNRISD (United Nations Research
Institute for Social Development) et al. https://socialprotection-humanrights.org/expertcom/
human-rights-based-approach-social-protection-migrants-tensions-contradictions-practice/.
Takala, Jukka, Päivi Hämäläinen, Kaija Leena Saarela, Loke Yoke Yun, Kathiresan Manickam, Tan
Wee Jin, Peggy Heng, Caleb Tjong, Lim Guan Kheng, Samuel Lim, Gan Siok Lin. 2014. “Global
estimates of the burden of injury and illness at work in 2012”. Journal of Occupational and
Environmental Hygiene 11(5): 326–337.

Chapter 1
Rationale for extending social protection to migrant workers and their families

UN (United Nations). 2018. Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economics and Social Affairs). 2017. International Migration
Report.
–––. 2019. International Migration 2019: Report.
–––. 2020. Sustainable Development Outlook 2020: Achieving SDGs in the wake of COVID-19:
Scenarios for policymakers.
UNRISD (United Nations Research Institute for Social Development) et al., n.d. LGBTQI+. https://
socialprotection-humanrights.org/key-issues/disadvantaged-and-vulnerable-groups/lgbtqi/.
Van Panhuys, Clara, Samia Kazi-Aoul and Geneviève Binette. 2017. “Migrant Access to Social
Protection under Bilateral Labour Agreements: A Review of 120 Countries and Nine Bilateral
Arrangements”, Extension of Social Security (ESS) Paper Series No. 57. https://ideas.repec.
org/p/ilo/ilowps/994955792602676.html.

39

40

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

41

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and
the international legal framework

42

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Key messages
► Migrants’ right to social security is firmly established in many international human rights instruments. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) establishes that everyone has the right to social security and
to an adequate standard of living and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
a highly ratified instrument, enshrines “the right of everyone to social security, including social insurance”
(Art. 9).
► The International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their
Families (1990) establishes migrants’ right to equality of treatment in respect of the right to social security
and under national legislation and the applicable treaties.
► These rights are also enshrined in a number of regional human rights treaties, including, among others, the
American Declaration on the Rights and Duties of Man (1948), the African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights (1981), the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2000) and the Inter-American
Convention on Protecting the Human Rights of Older Persons (2015). All of these instruments explicitly or
implicitly establish the right to social protection of nationals and/or migrant workers and their families.
► In fulfilment of its mandate, the ILO has adopted several instruments that incorporate key social
security principles that are relevant to migrant workers’ social protection, namely equality of treatment,
determination of applicable legislation, maintenance of acquired rights and provision of benefits abroad and
maintenance of rights in the course of acquisition. These include the Social Security (Minimum Standards)
Convention, 1952 (No. 102); the Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97); the Migrant
Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143); the Maintenance of Social Security Rights
Convention, 1982 (No. 157); the Maintenance of Social Security Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167);
the Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No. 118); and the Social Protection Floors
Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202).
► The ratification of international conventions is an important step towards enhancing migrant workers’
enjoyment of their social protection rights. It sets minimum standards for social security and ensures the
application of common rules by the various States concerned with migration.
► Notwithstanding ratification, countries can incorporate the rights enshrined in Conventions and
Recommendations into their national legislation and ensure equality of treatment with respect to social
security for migrants working in their territory.

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

►2.1 Introduction
Social security is a fundamental human right that is
firmly rooted in international law and increasingly
reflected in national legislation. It is enshrined in many
universally negotiated and accepted human rights
instruments, such as the Universal Declaration on
Human Rights (1948), the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1976). The 1944
Declaration of Philadelphia, an integral part of the ILO’s
Constitution, seeks to achieve “the extension of social
security measures to provide basic income to all in need
of such protection and comprehensive medical care”
(Art. III(f)). This effort has recently been reaffirmed
in the ILO Social Protection Floors Recommendation,
2012 (No. 202).
Yet despite this universally recognized obligation, only
30.6 per cent of the working-age population are legally
covered by comprehensive social protection and only
53.1 per cent, some 4.1 billion people, have no access
to any branch of social security and are thereby left
unprotected (ILO 2021).
Migrant workers, who move from one country
to another and whose protection should be the
shared responsibility of their territories of origin and
destination, find it particularly challenging to access
and benefit from national social protection systems.
Restrictive legislation, administrative regulations and
practical hurdles such as language barriers and lack
of information make it difficult for migrants to access
these systems. Thus, social protection coverage
remains, in principle, limited to the territory of the state
in which the system operates.
An international legal framework based on, among
other things, the ILO Conventions and Recommendations helps to safeguard migrants’ rights to social
protection. Based on the principles of equality of
treatment and non-discrimination, these instruments
provide countries with useful guidance on extending
coverage to migrant workers through bilateral and
multilateral agreements or unilateral measures. While
the human rights of all migrant workers should be
promoted and protected, regardless of their status,14
some of these Conventions and Recommendations draw a distinction within the spectrum of rights
guaranteed to migrant workers,15 depending on

whether they are in a regular or an irregular situation.
The first group comprises persons who are authorized
to enter, stay and engage in a remunerated activity in a
host state in accordance with its applicable laws while
the second comprises workers whose legal status is
inconsistent with those laws.16
This chapter will focus on international human and
labour rights instruments and regional treaties of
relevance to migrant workers’ social protection.
Section 1 provides an overview of several international and regional human rights instruments, section
2 focuses on ILO standards related to migrant workers’
social protection and section 3 shows how those
standards are put into practice, detailing the ratification, compliance and implementation processes at
the national level.

►2.2 The right to social security
under human rights instruments
As mentioned above, the right to social protection
is enshrined in several international and regional
human rights instruments. Each of these instruments is associated with a human rights treaty body,
a committee of independent experts which monitors
implementation of the convention or treaty based on
States parties’ reports and information received from
non-governmental organizations (NGOs).17

2.2.1 International human rights
instruments
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a
milestone in the history of human rights. It stipulates
in Article 22 that “Everyone, as a member of society,
has the right to social security” and in Article 25
that “Everyone has the right to a standard of living
adequate for the health and well-being of himself
and of his family, including food, clothing, housing
and medical care and necessary social services and
the right to security in the event of unemployment,
sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of
livelihood in circumstances beyond his control”. Article
25(2) establishes the right to special care and assistance

14

Under, for example, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (1976) and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of their Families

15

The ILO Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143) makes such a distinction: Part I covers all migrant
workers, irrespective of their status, while Part II only covers only those who are regularly admitted or are lawfully within a State’s
territory. It should be noted that States can ratify either or both of these parts. A similar distinction is drawn in the ICRMW.

16

See the Glossary and Chapter 6, which provides more detailed information on the international legal framework applicable to migrants
in an irregular situation.

17

For more information on the UN treaty bodies, see https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/Pages/TreatyBodies.aspx.

43

44

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

during motherhood and childhood. Although it is not
a treaty and thus does not constitute a formal source
of international law, the Declaration has been widely
recognized as a source of customary law (Kulke 2006).

International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, 1966
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (ICESCR) is a binding UN treaty that
entered into force in 1976 and has 171 States parties
as at April 2021. The Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights (CESCR) is the body of independent
experts that monitors its implementation. The
Covenant establishes that everyone has the right to
“social security, including social insurance” (Art. 9), to an
“adequate standard of living for himself and his family,
including adequate food, clothing and housing and to
the continuous improvement of living conditions” (Art.
11(1)) and to “the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health” (Art. 12(1)).
It also recognizes that “(…) working mothers should
be accorded paid leave or leave with adequate social
security benefits” (Art. 10(2). The CESCR has noted that
this article should be interpreted to cover both women
and men, who should be provided with paid maternity,
paternity or parental leave and cash benefits (CESCR
2005).
Each State party to the Covenant is required to “take
steps (…), to the maximum of its available resources,
with a view to achieving progressively the full realization
of the rights recognized in the present Covenant by
all appropriate means, including in particular the
adoption of legislative measures” (Art. 2(1)). One of
these rights is the right to social security. There is a
strong presumption that retrogression in realization
of the right to social security is prohibited under the
Covenant (CESCR 2008).
The Covenant imposes three types of obligations on
States parties: the obligation to respect, to protect and
to fulfil the right to social security (CESCR 2008).
► The obligation to respect requires that States
parties refrain from interfering directly or indirectly
with the enjoyment of the right to social security
(CESCR 2008, para. 44). In its General Comment 14:
The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of
Health (Art. 12), the Committee states that the obligation to respect the right to health requires States
to refrain “from denying or limiting equal access
for all persons, including […] illegal immigrants, to
preventive, curative and palliative health services”
and to abstain from “enforcing discriminatory
practices as a State policy” (CESCR 2000, para. 34).
18

► The Covenant also requires States parties to
ensure enjoyment of the rights established in the
Covenant without discrimination of any kind as to,
among other things, national or social origin (Art.
2(2)).18 However, it acknowledges constraints on
available resources and allows developing countries to determine to what extent they guarantee
the rights recognized therein (including the right
to social security) to non-nationals (Art. 2(3)). As the
monitoring body for the Covenant, the Committee
has left open the meaning of this provision but
has considered it “a restrictive exception to be
interpreted narrowly in the light of the object and
purpose of the Covenant” (Diller 2011, p. 112).
Unlike the obligations laid down in the Covenant
that are subject to progressive realization, the
prohibition of discrimination constitutes an obligation of immediate effect (CESCR 2008, para. 40).
► The obligation to protect requires that “States
prevent third parties from interfering in any way
with the enjoyment of the right to social security.
Third parties include individuals, groups, corporations and other entities, as well as agents acting
under their authority. The obligation includes,
inter alia, adopting the necessary and effective
legislative and other measures […] to restrain
third parties from denying equal access to social
security schemes operated by them or by others
and imposing unreasonable eligibility conditions
[…]” (CESCR 2008, para. 45).
Lastly, the obligation to fulfil requires sufficient
recognition of the right to social security within
national political and legal systems. This should
entail “adopting a national social security strategy
and plan of action to realize this right [and]
ensuring that the social security system will be
adequate, accessible for everyone, and will cover
social risks and contingencies” (CESCR 2008, para.
48); ensuring “that there is appropriate education
and public awareness concerning access to
social security schemes, particularly […] amongst
linguistic and other minorities” (CESCR 2008, para.
49); and establishing “non-contributory schemes
or other social assistance measures to provide
support to those individuals and groups who are
unable to make sufficient contributions for their
own protection” (CESCR 2008, para. 50).

The term “social origin” refers to a person’s inherited social status and is relevant to members of a descent-based community (caste) or
of a specific economic or social group, for example people living in poverty, homeless people or people living in an informal settlement
(CESCR, General comment No. 20: Non-discrimination in Economic, Social and Cultural rights, paras 24–26 and 35).

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

► Box 2.1 The position of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on migrant
workers’ entitlement to social security
In its General Comment No. 19 on the right to social security, the Committee states that where “migrant
workers have contributed to a social security scheme, they should be able to benefit from that contribution or retrieve their contributions if they leave the country” (CESCR 2008, para. 36). With regard to
non-contributory schemes, “[n]on-nationals should be able to access income support, affordable access
to health care and family support” (CESCR 2008, para. 37). According to the Committee, “any restrictions, including a qualification period, must be proportionate and reasonable” (CESCR 2008, para. 37).
Non-nationals and other disadvantaged groups, such as minorities, refugees, asylum seekers, internally
displaced persons and returnees, should also be given special attention by States as they face additional
hurdles in exercising their right to social security (CESCR 2008, para. 31).

International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 1966
While the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR) does not cover social rights, it establishes
several rights that have an indirect impact on the right
to social security, such as the right to life (Art. 6 (1)) and
to protection of the family (Art. 23) and the child (Art.
24). These rights must be granted without any discrimination based on factors such as “race, colour, sex,
language, religion, political or other opinion, national
or social origin, property, birth or other status” (Arts
2(1) and 26). Thus, migrant workers fall within the
scope of this Covenant.

International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of their Families, 1990
The International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their
Families (ICRMW), adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly in 1990, is the most comprehensive UN treaty on migrant workers. It was drafted
to address concerns regarding the clandestine
movement of migrant workers to European countries
and reports of their exploitation, including forced
labour, by reinforcing the link between human rights
and migrant workers. The Convention establishes

► Box 2.2 Access to Covenant rights, irrespective of migration or refugee status
In its General Comment No. 15: The Position of Aliens Under the Covenant, the Human Rights Committee
(HRC), as the body responsible for monitoring the implementation of this Covenant, stresses that each of
the rights established therein “must be guaranteed without discrimination between citizens and aliens”
(HRC 1986, para. 2). There are however, exceptions to this principle of non-discrimination: “[I]rregular
migrants do not enjoy political rights or, with certain important caveats, freedom of movement” (OHCHR
2014, p. 31). In that regard, the Committee has specified that “[c]onsent for entry may be given subject
to conditions relating, for example, to movement, residence and employment. […] However, once aliens
are allowed to enter the territory of a State party they are entitled to the rights set out in the Covenant”
(HRC 1986, para. 6). “Any other differences of treatment between nationals and non-nationals, including
migrants with irregular status, must be based on reasonable and objective criteria”.19 Similarly, in its
General comment No. 20 (para. 30), the Committee states that “[t]he ground of nationality should not bar
access to Covenant rights, e.g. all children within a State, including those with an undocumented status,
have a right to receive education and access to adequate food and affordable healthcare. The Covenant
rights apply to everyone including non-nationals, such as refugees, asylum-seekers, stateless persons,
migrant workers and victims of international trafficking, regardless of legal status and documentation.”

19

Human Rights Committee, F. H. Zwaan-de Vries v. The Netherlands, Communication No. 182/1984, Views adopted on 9 April 1987, para. 13,
cited in OHCHR 2014.

45

46

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

minimum standards that are applicable to migrant
workers and members of their families, irrespective
of their migratory status. Nonetheless, certain of its
provisions distinguish between migrants in a regular
and those in an irregular situation (OHCHR 2005).20
The Convention states that: “[w]ith respect to social
security, migrant workers and members of their
families shall enjoy in the State of employment the
same treatment granted to nationals in so far as they
fulfil the requirements provided for by the applicable
legislation of that State and the applicable bilateral and
multilateral treaties” (Art. 27).21 The Convention also
states that: “[m]igrant workers shall enjoy equality of
treatment with nationals of the State of employment
in respect of […] [p]rotection against dismissal; [u]
nemployment benefits; [and] [a]ccess to public work
schemes and alternative employment” (Art. 54).22
The Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (CMW)
is the body of independent experts that monitors
States parties’ implementation of the Convention. It
is important to note that to date, this instrument has
been ratified primarily by countries of origin and by
very few high-income countries of destination, a fact
that significantly limits its effectiveness.23

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 1979
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, which was adopted
in 1979 and entered into force in 1981, requires States

to take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in order to ensure their
enjoyment of the right to social security, “particularly in cases of retirement, unemployment, sickness,
invalidity and old age and other incapacity to work and
the right to paid leave,” and to family benefits (Arts
11(1)(e) and 13(a), respectively); and “to introduce
maternity leave with pay or with comparable social
benefits without loss of employment, seniority or social
allowances” (Art. 11(2b)). In its General Recommendation No. 24 on Women and Health, the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
the monitoring body for the Convention, emphasizes
that States must eliminate gender discrimination
relating to medical care, “particularly in the areas of
family planning, pregnancy, confinement and during
the post-natal period” (CEDAW 1999, para. 2). The
Convention also mentions the social protection of rural
women and calls on States to ensure their right “to
benefit directly from social security programmes” (Art.
14(2c)) rather than indirectly through their husband’s
social security, a situation that prevents them from
leaving a marriage and increases their vulnerability.
Depending on the reasons for rural women’s exclusion
from social security programmes, States parties
should revise their legislation to ensure equality of
treatment or implement measures aimed at formalizing the situation of these women, thus giving them
access to contributory social security programmes. The
establishment of well-designed SPFs can also provide
migrant woman with access to social protection,
including essential healthcare.

► Box 2.3 Paying attention to the rights of women
In its General Recommendation No. 24, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) stresses that “special attention should be given to the health needs and rights of
women belonging to vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, such as migrant women” (CEDAW 1999,
para. 6). In its General Recommendation No. 26 on Women Migrant Workers, it states that countries
of destination should “ensure that linguistically and culturally appropriate gender-sensitive services for
female migrant workers are available, including […] health-care services” (CEDAW 2008, para. 26(i)).

20

For their definitions and an explanation of the distinction between regular and irregular status, see the Glossary.

21

Article 27 is included in Part III of the Convention, “Human Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families” and thus, in
principle, covers all migrant workers and their families, irrespective of their status.

22

Article 54 is included in Part IV of the Convention, “Other Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of their Families who are Documented
or in a Regular Situation”.

23

Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uganda, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) (list available at: http://indicators.
ohchr.org/).

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),
1989
Also relevant to the social protection of migrant
workers is the Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CRC), which was adopted in 1989 and entered into
force in 1990. The Convention requires States parties to
“recognize for every child the right to benefit from social
security, including social insurance”; to “the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard of health”; and to
an adequate standard of living (including nutrition,
clothing and housing) (Arts 24, 2 and 27, respectively).
It prohibits discrimination on the basis of, among other
things, children’s national origin or that of their parents
or legal guardians (Art 2(1)).

International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 1965
Lastly, the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which was adopted
in 1965 and entered into force in 1969, establishes the
right of everyone to “public health, medical care, social
security and social services” (Art. 5(e)). It protects
migrant workers’ rights by specifically prohibiting
“distinctions, exclusions, restrictions or preferences
made by a State Party […] between citizens and non-citizens” (Art. 1(2)).

2.2.2 Regional human rights treaties
In addition, a number of regional human rights instruments establish the right to social protection. The
following is a non-limitative list; for more information
on regional social security agreements, see Chapter 3.
The American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of
Man (1948) recognizes the right of every person to
social security (Art. 16) while the American Convention
on Human Rights (ACHR) (1969) focuses on civil and
political rights. However, the Additional Protocol to the
American Convention on Human Rights in the Area
of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1988) further
details the provisions of the Declaration with a view
to its implementation in respect of economic, social
and cultural rights. The Protocol, which establishes
the right to social security (Art. 9) and to health (Art.
10), makes a distinction between migrant workers in a
regular and those in an irregular situation. Thus, Article
10 states that “[p]rimary healthcare, that is, essential
healthcare made available to all individuals and families
in the community,” applies to both while only migrant
workers in a regular situation are entitled to “extension
of the benefits of health services”.
The African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights
(1981) does not expressly include a provision on the
right to social protection. However, it does establish the
right to health (Art. 16) and the right of “[t]he aged and
the disabled” to special measures of protection (Art.
18(4)). The Protocol on the Right of Citizens to Social
Protection and Social Security includes provisions
on social protection for migrants, migrant workers,
refugees and displaced persons.

47

48

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Box 2.4 The rights of non-documented migrants and the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights: A landmark decision
In 2003, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights concluded unanimously in a remarkable decision
that the principles of non-discrimination and the right to equality were applicable to all residents of a
State, regardless of their immigration status and nationality: “The migratory status of a person can never
be a justification for depriving him of the enjoyment and exercise of his human rights, including those
related to employment”.24
The Court ruled that once an employment relationship has been assumed, unauthorized workers are
entitled to all of the labour and employment rights available to authorized workers, irrespective of their
regular or irregular status in the State of employment, since these rights arise from that relationship.
The Court’s recognition that States cannot limit the labour rights of unauthorized workers extends to
their right to social protection. States have “the obligation to respect and guarantee the labour human
rights of all workers, irrespective of their status as nationals or aliens, and not to tolerate situations of
discrimination that are harmful to the latter in employment relationships established between private
individuals (employer-worker)” (para. 9). Moreover, the State must take the necessary measures to
ensure that workers, including non-documented migrant workers, have all the appropriate means to
exercise their labour rights and that these are recognized and exercised in practice.
The decision was the outcome of the Government of Mexico’s request for an advisory opinion on the
application of the American Convention on Human Rights (ACHR) at the national level. The Government
had identified incompatibilities between the human rights system of the Organization of American
States (OAS) and the interpretations, practices and enactment of national laws by some States of the
region that, in practice, had deprived non-documented workers of their labour rights based on their
immigration status.
In the same decision, the Court ruled that it was competent to interpret not only the American Declaration
and the American Convention, but also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), “all […] instruments that protect human rights and […] are
applicable to the American States” (para. 55). It also ruled that the Advisory Opinion applied to all OAS
Member States that had signed the OAS Charter, the American Declaration or the Universal Declaration
or had ratified the ICCPR, whether or not they had ratified the ACHR.25

The Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms of the Commonwealth of Independent
States (1995) includes provisions on the right to
social security (Art. 16), to health protection (Art. 15)
and to equal protection of the law without discrimination, including on the grounds of nationality, place
of birth or other status (Art. 20). It has been ratified
by only four of the Commonwealth States: Belarus,
Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan.

The European Social Charter (revised) (1996) enshrines
all of the rights and guarantees established in the
original European Social Charter (1961) and the
Additional Protocol (1988) thereto and adds new rights,
including the right of employed women to protection
of maternity (Art. 8), the right to protection of health
(Art. 11), the right to social security (Art. 12), the right
to social and medical assistance for anyone without
adequate resources (Art. 13) and the right to benefit
from social welfare services (Art. 14). It also includes

24

Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Advisory Opinion OC-1803 of 17 September 2003, requested by the United Mexican States:
Juridical Condition and Rights of Undocumentd Migrants, para. 134. https://www.corteidh.or.cr/docs/opiniones/seriea_18_ing.pdf.

25

Several judgments of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights have followed the reasoning of this advisory opinion: Vélez Loor v.
Panama, para. 100; Nadege Dorzema et al. v. Dominican Republic, para. 154; and Pacheco Tineo Family v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, para.
129.

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

provisions on migrant workers and their families (Art.
19), which stipulate, among other things, that migrant
workers who are lawfully within the territory of a State
party should be accorded treatment not less favourable
than that of nationals of that State party in respect of
employment and working conditions and of contributions payable in respect of employed persons.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union (2000)26 recognizes the right to social security
and social assistance (Art. 34) and provides that
“everyone residing and moving legally within the
European Union is entitled to social security benefits
and social advantages in accordance with [European]
Community law and national laws and practices”.
To combat social exclusion and poverty, the Charter
“recognizes and respects the right to social and
housing assistance so as to ensure a decent existence
for all those who lack sufficient resources” (Art. 34(3)).
It also provides that “everyone has the right of access
to preventive healthcare and the right to benefit from
medical treatment” (Art. 35) and that “the family shall
enjoy legal, economic and social protection” (Art.
33(1)), including “the right to protection from dismissal
for a reason connected with maternity and the right to
paid maternity leave and to parental leave” (Art. 33(2)).
The Arab Charter on Human Rights (2004) provides
that “States parties shall ensure the right of everyone
to social security, including social insurance” (Art. 36)
and that “[e]ach State party shall ensure protection to
workers migrating to its territory in accordance with
the laws in force” (Art. 34).

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Human Rights Declaration (2013) contains provisions
on the right to social security (para. 30) and to an
adequate standard of living (para. 28). In paragraph
4, it expressly states that “[…] the rights of women,
children, the elderly, persons with disabilities, migrant
workers, and vulnerable and marginalized groups are
an inalienable, integral and indivisible part of human
rights and fundamental freedoms”.27 The ASEAN
Declaration on Strengthening Social Protection and
its Regional Framework and Action Plan also include
provisions related to the social protection rights of
migrant workers.
The Inter-American Convention on Protecting the
Human Rights of Older Persons (2015) states that “[a]
ll older persons have the right to social security […] so
that they can live in dignity” and that, in accordance
with national legislation, “States parties shall progressively promote, within available resources, the
provision of income to ensure a dignified life for older
persons through social security systems and other
flexible social protection mechanisms” and shall “seek
to facilitate, through institutional agreements, bilateral
treaties, and other hemispheric mechanisms, the
recognition of benefits, social security contributions,
and pension entitlements for older migrant persons”
(Art. 17).

26

The Charter is a declaration which was given legal binding force in Article 6 of the Treaty of Lisbon, 2007.

27

To be read in conjunction with para. 34, among others.

49

50

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Box 2.5 International human and labour rights and the COVID-19 crisis
The current COVID-19 pandemic is a major public health crisis which is seriously affecting socio-economic
growth in countries of origin, transit and destination and is resulting in violations of human and labour
rights. Migrant workers and their families are particularly affected; a number of reports have documented
rising levels of discrimination against them, together with issues of food security, worsening of working
conditions, layoffs, increased restrictions on movement and forced return (ILO 2020a). Furthermore, a
large proportion of these workers face challenges in accessing social protection, including healthcare
and income security. Taken together, these factors further heighten their vulnerability.
In order to combat these challenges and ensure the social protection of migrant workers and their
families, policymakers must develop policy responses that are in line with international human rights
and international labour standards. The ILO’s Employment and Decent Work for Peace and Resilience
Recommendation, 2017 (No. 205) provides member States with useful guidance on ways to generate
employment and decent work, including social protection, for purposes of prevention, recovery, peace
and resilience in crisis situations arising from conflicts and disasters. It highlights the need for States to
ensure basic income security; develop, restore or enhance comprehensive social security schemes; and
ensure effective access to healthcare and basic social services (para. 21) and to “establish, re-establish
or maintain social protection floors and seek to close the gaps in their coverage, taking into account the
Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention, 1952 (No. 102), the Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202), and other relevant international labour standards” (para. 22).
While the pandemic requires an immediate and necessary short-term emergency response “to ensure
that all migrant workers have access to healthcare and income protection; suitable working and living
conditions, including compliance with occupational safety and health standards; and relevant information
on COVID-19”, these should, wherever possible, be incorporated into “longer-term strategies that
combine them with the existing institutional structures and delivery mechanisms of national social
protection systems in order to prevent fragmentation”. In order to build sustainable, socially responsive
and widely accepted social protection schemes and inclusive Covid-19 response measures, States should
also consult with workers’ and employers’ organizations (ILO 2020b).

►2.3 ILO standards of relevance
to migrant workers’ social
protection
At the heart of the ILO’s mandate is “the extension
of social security measures to provide basic income
to all in need of such protection and comprehensive
medical care” (Declaration of Philadelphia, Art. 3(f)).
The right to social security and to related rights, such
as the right to health, and to an adequate standard of
living28 are enshrined in recent ILO Conventions and
Recommendations,29 including the Social Protection
Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202).
Since its inception, the Organization’s work has also
included the protection of migrant workers; the
preamble to the Declaration of Philadelphia refers to

“the interests of workers when employed in countries
other than their own”. For this reason, and as an
expression of the principle of non-discrimination, it
should be borne in mind that, unless otherwise stated,
all ILO standards apply to migrant workers (ILO 2020c).
Government, Worker and Employer members of
the ILO have adopted a number of Conventions and
Recommendations with provisions related to the social
security rights of migrant workers and their family
members. These instruments provide guidance as to
the normative content of the right and its corollary
obligations for ratifying States. More specifically, as
detailed in Table 2.1, they establish the following key
social security principles related to the coordination of
social security schemes (Hirose, Nikac and Tamagno
2011; ISSA 2014):

28

For more information, see: (https://socialprotection-humanrights.org/key-issues/relationship-with-other-human-rights/.

29

For a list of these instruments, see: https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:62:0::NO:62:P62_LIST_ENTRIE_ID:2453907:NO.

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

► equality of treatment: to the extent possible,
migrant workers should have the same rights and
obligations as nationals of the destination country
in respect of social security coverage and benefits;
► determination of the applicable legislation to
ensure that migrant workers are governed by
the legislation of only one country at any given
moment. They should normally be subject to
the legislation of the country in which they are
employed (principle of lex loci laboris). Exceptions
to this principle are sometimes made in the case
of posted workers, self-employed migrant workers
and temporary migrant workers;
► maintenance of acquired rights and provision of
benefits abroad (portability of earned benefits):30
migrant workers who have acquired rights in one
territory should be guaranteed those rights in any
of the States parties to the relevant instruments.
Under this principle, benefits payable under the
legislation of one State should be paid abroad
and should not be subject to reduction, modification, suspension, cancellation, or confiscation
simply because the person resides in the territory
of another State party;

► maintenance of rights in the course of acquisition
(totalization)31 provides for the accumulation of
qualifying periods under different national social
security schemes with a view to the aggregation or
totalization of periods of insurance, employment
or residence required for the acquisition, maintenance or recovery of rights and for sharing the
costs of benefits paid.
It is also critical for social security agreements to include
stipulations on the provision of mutual administrative
assistance, including data and information exchange.32
In addition to these key principles enshrined in ILO
instruments (see Table 2.1), social security agreements
are often based on the principle of reciprocity, under
which each State party to an agreement undertakes
to apply the same mechanisms as every other State
party in order to make its social security benefits more
accessible to migrant workers. However, reciprocity in
bilateral agreements can also have a limiting effect,
particularly for refugees and during negotiations
where the social security systems of two States parties
to a bilateral agreement are at different stages of
development.

► Table 2.1 Overview of key principles enshrined in ILO Conventions and Recommendations

ILO Conventions and
Recommendations

Equality of
treatment*

C19 – Equality of Treatment (Accident
Compensation) Convention, 1925
(interim status)

Yes

C97 – Migration for Employment
Convention (Revised), 1949

Yes

R86 – Migration for Employment
(Revised), 1949

Yes

C102 – Social Security (Minimum
Standards) Convention, 1952

Yes

Applicable
legislation

Maintenance
of acquired
rights and
provision
of benefits
abroad

Maintenance
of rights in
the course of
acquisition

Yes

Yes

Administrative
assistance

R100 - Protection of Migrant Workers
(Underdeveloped Countries)
Yes
Recommendation, 1955 (interim status)

30

The provision of benefits abroad is also referred to as the “exportability” of benefits; see Box 3.3.

31

For example, the United States often refers to “totalization agreements”; see Chapter 3.

32

This is recommended by the Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No. 118); the Maintenance of Social Security Rights
Convention, 1982 (No. 157); and Migrant Workers Recommendation, 1975 (No. 151).

51

52

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

ILO Conventions and
Recommendations

Equality of
treatment*

C118 – Equality of Treatment (Social
Security) Convention, 1962

Yes

C121 – Employment Injury Benefits
Convention, 1964 [Schedule I amended
in 1980]

Yes

R122 – Employment Policy
Recommendation, 1964

Yes

Applicable
legislation

Maintenance
of acquired
rights and
provision
of benefits
abroad

Maintenance
of rights in
the course of
acquisition

Administrative
assistance

Yes

Yes

Yes

C128 – Invalidity, Old-Age and
Survivors' Benefits Convention, 1967
C130 – Medical Care and Sickness
Benefits Convention, 1969

Yes

C143 – Migrant Workers
(Supplementary Provisions)
Convention, 1975

Yes

R151 – Migrant Workers
Recommendation, 1975

Yes

Yes

C157 – Maintenance of Social Security
Rights Convention, 1982

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R167 – Maintenance of Social Security
Rights Recommendation, 1983

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

C168 – Employment Promotion and
Protection against Unemployment
Convention, 1988

Yes

MLC, 2006 – Maritime Labour
Convention (as amended)

Yes

R201 – Domestic Workers
Recommendation, 2011

Yes

R202 – Social Protection Floors
Recommendation, 2012

Yes

R205 - Employment and Decent
Work for Peace and Resilience
Recommendation, 2017

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

* A number of other standards also promote non-discrimination against and equality of treatment of a specific population group. As
these groups often include migrant workers, their provisions are of particular relevance: Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189)
Art. 14; Home Work Convention, 1996 (No. 177), Art. 4; Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997 (No. 181), Art. 5; Part-Time Work
Convention, 1994 (No. 175), Art. 4; Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention, 2001 (No. 184) Art. 17; Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
Convention, 1989 (No. 169), Art. 20; and Transition from the Informal to the Formal Economy Recommendation, 2015 (No. 204), Art.
16-21.
Source: The text of the respective Conventions and Recommendations. See the ILO’s Information System on International Labour
Standards (NORMLEX).

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

2.3.1 ILO social security instruments
Social Security (Minimum Standards)
Convention, 1952 (No. 102)
The Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention,
1952 (No. 102) is the flagship ILO social security
Convention and can serve as a benchmark and
reference for the gradual development of comprehensive social security systems at the national level. It
establishes minimum standards for all nine branches
of social security with respect to the coverage of the
population, the level of benefits to be provided by
social security schemes for each risk, the conditions
for entitlement to those benefits and related statistical
requirements for demonstrating compliance. It also
sets out the core principles to be observed, irrespective
of the type of social security system, including the
general responsibility of the State for the due provision
of benefits and for proper administration of the institutions and services concerned in securing the provision
of benefits; participation of protected persons in the
management of social security schemes; collective
financing of social security schemes; adjustment of
pensions in payment; and the right to appeal refusal
of a benefit and to lodge a complaint as to its quality
or quantity. In order to ratify the Convention, States
must accept at least three of the nine branches of
social security. As at October 2021, 60 countries have
ratified the Convention (see section 2.4.1 for more
details on the supervisory mechanisms and reasons
for ratification), which has also served as a benchmark
for the development of instruments at the regional
level, including the European Social Charter and the
European Code of Social Security.
The Convention establishes the principle of equality
of treatment between national and non-national
residents of countries of employment, which is
applicable to all nine branches of social security (Art.

68(1)). It nevertheless allows for two exceptions in the
application of this principle. First, a State can establish
special rules “in respect of benefits or portions of
benefits which are payable wholly or mainly out of
public funds and in respect of transitional schemes”
(Art. 68(1)). Thus, a State party may require non-nationals to complete a period of residence that would
not be required of its nationals. Second, under contributory social schemes, States may limit equality
of treatment by applying the relevant Part of the
Convention only to the nationals of States parties that
have also accepted obligations under that Part (Art.
68(2)). In such cases, equality of treatment may require
a bilateral or multilateral reciprocity agreement. In
practice, this condition of reciprocity may pose an
obstacle to full application of the principle of equality
of treatment to migrant workers,33 refugees or workers
in the informal economy.

Social Protection Floors Recommendation,
2012 (No. 202)
In June 2012, the International Labour Conference
adopted the Social Protection Floors Recommendation,
2012 (No. 202), an important tool for promotion of the
rights of migrant workers and their families. While
not binding on ILO member States, the Recommendation provides useful guidance for building SPFs
within comprehensive social security systems for all in
need. It also calls on member States to extend social
protection and progressively ensure higher levels of
social security to as many people as possible, guided by
the Organization’s social security standards: “Subject
to their existing international obligations, Members
should provide basic social security guarantees to at
least all residents and children, as defined in national
laws and regulations” (para. 6). Thus, these guarantees
should be provided, at least to migrant workers with
residence status and to children, irrespective of their
status and that of their parents or guardians. The

► Additional information
Toolkit on ILO social security standards, including status of ratification of up-to-date social security
Conventions (https://www.social-protection.org/gimi/Standards.action)
Ratification of key international UN or ILO Conventions with respect to migrants’ rights to social protection
(https://www.social-protection.org/gimi/ShowProjectWiki.action?id=3268&pid=2657)

33

For instance, the issue of reciprocity can be an important hurdle when concluding a social security agreement between countries whose
national social security systems are at different levels of development.

53

54

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

mention of “all” residents emphasizes that all types or
categories of residents and residence status as defined
under national law, whether permanent or temporary,
should be included (ILO 2019a, para. 130).
Social protection floor guarantees can be put in place
through a variety of means, including contributory
and non-contributory social schemes or transfers.
By implementing national SPFs, countries of origin,
transit and destination can ensure that emigrant and
immigrant workers and their families have, at least,
access to essential healthcare and basic income security
throughout their life cycle, including for returning
migrants and dependents living in a different country
from the migrant breadwinner. This also reduces
potential pressure on migrant workers to support their
families and communities back home, thus limiting
the need for remittances and other private initiatives, and ensures equal access to basic social security
guarantees.

Equality of Treatment (Social Security)
Convention, 1962 (No. 118)
The Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention,
1962 (No.118) establishes the obligation of equal
treatment, contingent upon reciprocity; this means
that the obligation does not concern all non-nationals employed in the territory of a State party to
the Convention, but only those who are nationals of
another State that has also ratified the Convention
(Art. 3).
► Article 3 establishes the principle of equality of
treatment under the legislation of a ratifying State,

“both as regards coverage and as regards the
right to benefits [and] in respect of every branch
of social security for which [the ratifying State] has
accepted the obligations of the Convention”.
► Pursuant to Article 4, equality of treatment
must not be limited by a condition of residence
imposed solely upon non-nationals (except for
certain non-contributory schemes, the duration
of which must not exceed the limits set out in the
Convention) (Hirose, Nikac and Tamagno 2011,
p. 9).
► Article 5 establishes the principle of the provision
of benefits abroad, including old-age, invalidity and
survivors’ benefits, death grants and employment
injury pensions.
► With regard to the maintenance of social security
rights, Article 7 provides that States that have
ratified the Convention must “endeavour to participate in schemes for the maintenance of acquired
rights and rights in the course of acquisition under
their legislation of the nationals” of States for
which the Convention is also in force.
Lastly, the Convention’s provisions are applicable to
refugees and stateless persons, for whom equality
of treatment must be secured without any condition
of reciprocity (Art. 10). As at October 2021, there are
38 States parties to the Convention. However, the
aforementioned ILO mapping of 120 countries shows
that the laws of some States that have not ratified
it nevertheless include provisions on equality of
treatment. On the other hand, a few States that have
ratified the Convention do not provide for such equality
in their national legislation.

► Box 2.6 Basic social security guarantees for all residents and children (Recommendation
No. 202, para. 6): Observations of the Committee of Experts on the Application of
Conventions and Recommendations (CEACR) in the 2019 General Survey concerning the
Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202)
In its 2019 General Survey, the CEACR: “Equal treatment in coverage and access to social security should
be guaranteed to all members of society, who should stand together, non-nationals and nationals, to
provide this protection as an expression of solidarity” (ILO 2019s, para. 142). It also emphasizes that
non-discrimination is a key principle on which the right to social security is premised and which “pertains
to all persons, irrespective of status and origin” (ILO 2019a, para. 143).
The Committee calls on member States “to establish the principle of equality of treatment to ensure
that non-national residents, irrespective of their immigration status, have the same social security rights
as nationals” (IL0 2019a, para. 143). It “hopes that member States will make efforts to provide non-nationals, even those in an irregular status, including workers in an irregular situation, with access to basic
benefits, and particularly to any medical care that is urgently required” (ILO 2019a, para. 143).

Chapter 2

55

treatment
with
respectlegal
to social
security
Migrant equality
workers’ rightof
to social
security and
the international
framework
FIGURE 2.1 Countries that grant
(excluding healthcare), with an indication of whether they have ratiﬁed
► Figure 2.1 Countries that grant equality of treatment with respect to social security (excluding
that grant
equality
of treatment
with
respect
social Convention
security
healthcare),
with an
indication
of whether
they
haveto
ratified
No. 118
FIGURE 2.1 Countries

(excluding healthcare), with an indication of whether they have ratiﬁed

Countries with legal provisions granting equality of treatment & which ratiﬁed C118
Countries with legal provisions granting equality of treatment
Countries which ratiﬁed C118
No legal provisions granting equality of treatment & which did not ratify C118
Countries that were not reviewed as of March 2017

Countries with legal provisions granting equality of treatment & which ratiﬁed C118
Countries with legal provisions granting equality of treatment
Countries which ratiﬁed C118
Maintenance of Social Security Rights
benefits abroad, including various methods for the
No legal provisions granting
equality of treatment & which did not ratify C118
Convention, 1982 (No. 157) and
totalization of benefits and provisions concerning the
Countries
that
were
not
reviewed
as ofofMarch
maintenance
rights 2017
in relations between or with
Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167)
In the same vein, the Maintenance of Social Security
Rights Convention, 1982 (No.157) provides rules for
the adoption of national legislation implementing the
principles of the maintenance of rights in the course of
acquisition and of acquired rights for migrant workers
in respect of all branches of social security. As at
October 2021, it has been ratified by only four countries:
Kyrgyzstan, the Philippines, Spain and Sweden.
The Convention is supplemented by the non-binding
Maintenance of Social Security Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167), which includes in annex model
provisions for the conclusion of bilateral or multilateral
social security instruments and a model agreement
for the coordination of such instruments. These model
provisions include common definitions and rules
on determination of the applicable legislation. They
also cover the maintenance of rights in the course
of acquisition and acquired rights and provision of

provident funds (Hirose, Nikac and Tamagno 2011,
p.12).

Equality of Treatment (Accident Compensation)
Convention, 1925 (No. 19)
Adopted by the ILC in 1925, the Equality of Treatment
(Accident Compensation) Convention (No. 19)
demonstrates the ILO’s role in promoting migrant
workers’ rights since its inception. The Convention
requires that nationals of States parties thereto who
suffer personal injury owing to work accidents be
accorded “the same treatment in respect of workmen’s
compensation” as that granted to the nationals of
the employment country, without any condition
of residence (Art. 1). Although this Convention has
interim status and is currently open for denunciation,
it remains in force for States that have ratified it and,
with 121 States parties, it is one of the most ratified ILO
Conventions.

56

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

2.3.2 ILO migrant workers instruments
Migration for Employment Convention, 1949
(No. 97) and Recommendation (Revised), 1949
(No. 86)
The Migration for Employment Convention, 1949 (No.
97) was developed in order to facilitate the movement
of surplus labour and to protect migrant workers from
exploitation and discrimination. It covers immigrants
who are lawfully within the territory of a State party.
During the discussion leading to its adoption, the CEACR
was of the opinion that it “should apply only to migrants
for employment, including, of course, refugees and
displaced persons migrating for employment, and
not to migrants in general” (ILO 2016). The categories
excluded are frontier workers, seafarers, members of
liberal professions and artists entering employment on
a short-term basis (Art. 11(2)).
The Convention enshrines the principle of not less
favourable treatment in various areas, including
conditions of employment, freedom of association and social security (Art. 6), and encourages the
conclusion of labour agreements to regulate migration
for employment, whenever desirable, in cases where
number of migrants is sufficiently large (Art. 10). It
also requires States to facilitate labour migration and
to establish free assistance and information services
(Annex I, Art. 6).
The Convention is complemented by the Migration for
Employment Recommendation (Revised), 1949 (No.
86) and, in annex thereto, the Model Agreement on
Temporary and Permanent Migration for Employment,
including Migration of Refugees and Displaced
Persons, aimed at helping member States to formulate
appropriate clauses when drafting bilateral agreements
on the organization of migration for employment. The
Model Agreement encourages States to conclude a
separate bilateral social security agreement.

Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions)
Convention, 1975 (No. 143) and Migrant
Workers Recommendation, 1975 (No. 151)
The Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions)
Convention, 1975 (No. 143) complements Convention
No. 97 and expands its protection and scope. It was
developed to facilitate and regulate migration flows
and thus to eliminate irregular migration, suppress
the activities of organizers of clandestine movements
of migrants and provide minimum protection to all
migrant workers.

It is a flexible instrument that allows States to ratify
Part I, Part II or both. Part I, on migration in abusive
conditions (Arts 1–9), includes provisions on the
protection of all migrant workers, irrespective of their
migrant status, upon loss of employment; in fact, such
loss should not automatically result in loss of residence
or work permit (Art. 8(1)). However, this should be
distinguished from the right to stay. Migrants in an
irregular situation are entitled to equal treatment in
respect of rights arising out of past employment with
regard to remuneration, social security and related
benefits (Art. 9(1) and (2)).
Part II, on equality of opportunity and treatment (Arts
10-14), covers only migrants in a regular situation.
The Convention establishes the principle of equality
of treatment in respect of social security by requiring
States parties to adopt a national policy guaranteeing
equality of opportunity and treatment for migrant
workers and members of their families who reside
lawfully within their territory in respect of employment
and occupation, social security, and trade union
and cultural rights (Art. 10). It also provides for the
conclusion of multilateral or bilateral agreements with
a view to resolving problems arising from its application
(Art. 15).
The complementary Migrant Workers Recommendation, 1975 (No. 151) guarantees migrant workers
and members of their family effective equality of
opportunity and treatment with nationals of the host
country in respect of “social security measures and
welfare facilities and benefits provided in connection
with employment” (para. 2). It states that “migrant
workers whose position has not been or could not
be regularised should enjoy equality of treatment
for themselves and their families in respect of rights
arising out of present and past employment as regards
remuneration, social security and other benefits,
among others” (para. 8(3)) and that:
(1) A migrant worker who leaves the country of
employment should be entitled, irrespective of
the legality of his stay therein-a. to any outstanding remuneration for work
performed, including severance payments
normally due;
b. to benefits which may be due in respect of any
employment injury suffered;
c. in accordance with national practice--

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

► Additional information
Video 1: The Role of ILO Conventions on Migrant Workers in Realizing Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
Video 2: ILO Conventions on Migrant Workers: flexibility, validity, relevance and scope

(i) to compensation in lieu of any holiday
entitlement acquired but not used;
(ii) to reimbursement of any social security
contributions which have not given and will
not give rise to rights under national laws or
regulations or international arrangements:
Provided that where social security
contributions do not permit entitlement
to benefits, every effort should be made
with a view to the conclusion of bilateral or
multilateral agreements to protect the rights
of migrants. (para. 34).

2.3.3 Other relevant ILO instruments
Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189)
and Recommendation, 2011 (No. 201)
The International Labour Conference, at its 100th
session, adopted the Domestic Workers Convention,
2011 (No. 189), which recognizes that “domestic work
continues to be undervalued and invisible and is mainly
carried out by women and girls, many of whom are
migrants or members of disadvantaged communities
and who are particularly vulnerable to discrimination in
respect of conditions of employment and of work, and
to other abuses of human rights” (fourth preambular
paragraph).
The Convention, which entered into force in 2013 and,
as at October 2021, has been ratified by 35 member

States, calls on States parties to take appropriate
measures “to ensure that domestic workers enjoy
conditions that are not less favourable than those
applicable to workers generally in respect of social
security protection”, including maternity benefits.
It is supplemented by the Domestic Workers
Recommendation, 2011 (No. 201), which encourages
States to adopt additional measures to ensure the
effective protection of migrant domestic workers, such
as facilitating the payment of social security contributions, concluding bilateral social security agreements
and securing access of domestic workers to complaint
mechanisms at the national level.

ILO Multilateral Framework on Labour
Migration (2006)
The Multilateral Framework on Labour Migration:
Non-binding Principles and Guidelines for a Rightsbased Approach to Labour Migration (2006) calls
for a rights-based approach to labour migration
and addresses the need to promote decent work for
all. Developed based on the relevant international
labour standards and an analysis of policy and of the
ILO’s mandate, it includes nine sections, 15 principles
and some 120 guidelines. With regard specifically to
social protection, it promotes the implementation of a
national policy ensuring equality of treatment in respect
of regular migrant workers and, where appropriate,
migrant workers with irregular status and supports the
conclusion of social security agreements to ensure the
portability of entitlements (Guideline 9.9).

57

58

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Box 2.7 COVID-19 and a few examples of countries’ response with respect to healthcare
During a pandemic, the most essential aspect of social protection is ensuring nationals’ and non-nationals’ access to quality healthcare. As such, in line with the international Conventions and rights
outlined in the previous sections, countries must ensure that not only their citizens, but also non-nationals present in their territory receive the support required. Some States are extending their social
protection mechanisms in the area of healthcare specifically to migrants and their families (ILO 2020b):
France and Spain – These two countries have extended the residence permits of migrants and their
families for an additional three months to ensure their access to healthcare.
Portugal – The State has regularized the status of non-nationals, including asylum seekers with pending
applications, thus entitling them to healthcare, employment, social support and housing.
Colombia – Migrants and refugees are entitled to free medical consultations, irrespective of their
migratory status.
Thailand – Nationals and non-nationals with a valid work permit who contract COVID-19 receive free
treatment for the first 72 hours.
Qatar – Free medical services, including medical check-ups and quarantine services, are provided to
migrants.

►2.4 Putting ILO standards into
practice: ratification, compliance
and implementation at the
national level
Ratification is a formal procedure whereby a State
accepts a Convention as a legally binding instrument.
States are the principal subjects of international law.
By ratifying a convention, they assume obligations at
the international level and undertake to bring their
national law and practice into line with the international standards established therein.
In some countries with a monist legal regime, ratified
conventions are automatically incorporated into
national law and can thus be applied directly by the
national courts. Countries with a dualist regime are
required to translate a convention into domestic law
before it can be applied by the national courts, after
which implementing legislation must be adopted
in order to give full effect to the rights set out in
the instrument. In practice, the distinction is more
complex; countries may have varying degrees of these
regimes or a mix thereof. It is, however, important to
clarify at the national level the relationship between
ratified international or regional human rights instruments and national legislation.

In addition to their obligation to give effect to the
provisions of a ratified Convention in national law and
practice, States parties are also required to present
reports on the application of each Convention on
a regular basis pursuant to article 22 of the ILO
Constitution.

2.4.1 The ILO’s supervisory procedures
for ensuring compliance with
international labour standards
As a standard-setting organization, the ILO, through
the tripartite representatives of its member States,
develops and adopts Conventions and Recommendations, a number of which have been outlined in the
previous section. Compliance with these international
labour standards is monitored through the Organization’s regular supervisory system by the ILO’s
Committee of Experts on the application of Conventions and Recommendations (CEACR) and the International Labour Conference’s tripartite Committee on
the Application of Conventions and Recommendations
(CAS). There are also special procedures, which are
described below.

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

Member States that have ratified an ILO Convention
are subject to the regular supervisory procedure and
must report periodically on their implementation of
the instrument to the CEACR, which can make two
kinds of comments: observations and direct requests.
Observations are the Committee’s notes on whether a
State has properly implemented the Conventions and
are published in its annual report.34 They are generally
made where there is persistent non-compliance with
a particular Convention on the part of a State but
can also be used to point out an improvement or a
measure taken pursuant to a Convention. The Committee’s direct requests concern more technical questions
or requests for information and clarification. They are
not published and are communicated directly to the
Government concerned.

therein to provide further information. In many cases,
the CAS makes recommendations to the Conference,
which may decide to recommend ways in which these
Governments can address the issues raised in the
observations.

The Committee’s comments often reflect general
problems that are regularly encountered in the
implementation of specific provisions. In the past, as
regards social protection, they have concerned the
provision of full statistical information, the adjustment
of long-term benefits in order to take into account
changes in the cost of living and prevent loss of the
real value of pensions, and difficulties in the application
of Conventions arising from reforms of social security
systems (Kulke, Chichon and Pal 2007, p. 21).

The ratification of Conventions is a key step towards
enhancing migrant workers’ enjoyment of their social
protection rights and, in the context of international
labour migration, is beneficial for countries of origin
and destination. It is also good practice as it protects
both non-national workers and a country’s own
nationals.

For instance, in 2015, while examining Thailand’s
implementation of the Equality of Treatment (Accident
Compensation) Convention, 1925 (No. 19), the
Committee welcomed the efforts of the Thai Social
Security Office to facilitate migrant workers’ access
to benefits from the Workmen’s Compensation Fund
and requested the Government to provide information
on the decisions taken by the Office and the practical
impact of those measures on employers’ compliance
with their obligation to compensate their workers,
whether documented or undocumented, for occupational injuries (ILO 2015).
The CEACR publishes an annual General Survey on
member States’ law and practice with respect to a
particular subject, chosen by the ILO Governing Body.
The General Survey considers all member States,
regardless of whether they have ratified a Convention
or adopted a related Recommendation.
The CAS is a standing committee of the International
Labour Conference (ILC). It is made up of Government,
Employer and Worker delegates and is tasked with
tripartite review of the annual report of the CEACR.
It selects a few observations from this report for
discussion and invites the Governments mentioned

34

This regular system is different from the ILO’s special
procedures, which are generally designed to respond
to representations and complaints made by employers’
and workers’ representatives, member States and the
Governing Body of the Organization (under, respectively, arts 24–25 and 26–33 of the ILO Constitution) in
respect of a State’s violation of ILO Conventions.

2.4.2 Why ratify ILO Conventions?

Conventions can guide States in the formulation of
labour migration policies at various levels; their ratification sets minimum standards in the area of social
security, ensures the application of common rules by
the various States concerned with migration and is a
strong indicator of a State’s commitment to enhancing
its national migration laws and policies.
Certain Conventions are flexible, allowing ratifying
States to accept one or more of their parts or
provisions. States that have ratified a Convention can
benefit from international monitoring, guidance and
technical assistance provided by the ILO or through
its supervisory mechanism in order to support its
application.
Furthermore, the ILO’s tripartite structure ensures that
social security standards and principles are backed by
governments, employers and workers alike since they
reflect international consensus between governments
and the social partners on how a specific problem
posed by international labour migration, such as the
lack of coordination of social security schemes, can be
addressed.

For more information on annual reports since 1932, please visit: https://www.ilo.org/global/standards/applying-and-promotinginternational-labour-standards/committee-of-experts-on-the-application-of-conventions-and-recommendations/lang--en/index.htm.

59

60

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

2.4.3 Status of ratifications in the
world
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (ICESCR) is widely ratified with 171
States parties as at June 2021. However, the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families
(ICPRMW) has been signed by only 68 countries and
ratified by 55. The two ILO Conventions that focus
specifically on migrant workers are the Migration for
Employment Convention (No. 97), 1949 and the Migrant
Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975
(No. 143). As at October 2021, 53 States have ratified
Convention No. 97 (including 28 that have excluded
one or more of its Annexes) and 28 have ratified
Convention No. 143 (Table 2.2).35

Burkina Faso, Tajikistan and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) are the only three countries that have
ratified the ICPRMW and the two migrant-specific
ILO Conventions without any reservations. Four other
countries have also ratified them but have excluded
some of their provisions: Albania (Part II of Convention
No. 143), Algeria (Annex II to Convention No. 97), Bosnia
and Herzegovina (Annex III of Convention No. 97) and
the Philippines (Annexes II and III to Convention No.
97).
The most widely ratified social security conventions of
relevance to migrant workers are Conventions Nos 19
and 102 with 121 and 60 ratifications, respectively, as at
October 2021.

► Table 2.2 Number of ratifications, by ILO Convention

ILO Convention

Number of
ratifications (as at
October 2021)

Equality of Treatment (Accident Compensation) Convention, 1925 (No. 19) (interim status)

121

Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97)

53

Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention, 1952 (No. 102)

60

Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No. 118)

38

Employment Injury Benefits Convention, 1964 (No. 121) [Schedule I amended in 1980]

24

Invalidity, Old-Age and Survivors’ Benefits Convention, 1967 (No. 128)

17

Medical Care and Sickness Benefits Convention, 1969 (No. 130)

16

Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143)

28

Maintenance of Social Security Rights Convention, 1982 (No.157)

4

Employment Promotion and Protection against Unemployment Convention, 1988 (No. 168)

8

Maritime Labour Convention (as amended), 2006

98

Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189)

35

35

For current ratification numbers, see the ILO’s NORMLEX website: https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:12001::::::.

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

While the low number of ratifications of these international instruments reflects an important gap in the
application of international standards at the national
and regional levels, this does not mean that migrant
workers have no protection under national legislation
and bilateral or multilateral agreements on social
protection. For example, at the national level, a State
that has not ratified the Conventions establishing the
principle of equality of treatment36 may choose to
accord migrants and its nationals the same treatment
without being bound by international obligations. The
low level of ratification of some of the Conventions that
provide for equality of treatment in respect of migrant
workers does not signify that equality is not ensured at
the national level by non-signatory countries. In fact,
many destination countries afford such treatment to
non-nationals under their jurisdiction. Moreover, other
international and regional agreements can influence
national legislation and practice.; For example, the EU’s
Migration Directives establish the social security rights
of EU Blue Card holders and migrant workers who hold
long-term residence permits.

►2.5 Conclusion
The right to social security is enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (1948) and in several
international and regional human rights instruments,
including the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (1966), the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of their Families (1990), the
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union
(2000) and the Arab Charter on Human Rights (2004).
The ICRMW draws a distinction between migrants in a
regular and those in an irregular situation with respect
to certain rights yet acknowledges that human rights
should apply to all migrant workers.
These rights and protections have been shown to lie
also at the heart of the ILO’s mandate, which seeks,
among other priorities, to protect migrant workers
and extend social security measures to all in need of
such protection. Key principles related to the coordination of social security schemes and the protection
of migrant workers are enshrined in ILO Conventions and Recommendations and include equality of
treatment, determination of the applicable legislation,
maintenance of acquired rights and provision of
benefits abroad, maintenance of rights in the course of
acquisition and mutual administrative assistance.

36

See Table 2.2

The Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention,
1952 (No. 102) is the ILO’s flagship social security
Convention and sets worldwide agreed minimum
standards for all nine branches of social security.
This Convention, together with the Social Protection
Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202), serve as a
benchmark and reference for the development of
comprehensive social security systems at the national
level. Convention No. 102 also establishes the principle
of equality of treatment between non-national and
national residents across all nine branches of social
security with certain exceptions. This principle is also
at the centre of the Equality of Treatment (Social
Security) Convention, 1962 (No.118). Eight ILO Conventions include provisions on the maintenance of rights
in the course of acquisition, acquired rights and the
provision of benefits abroad (Table 2.1). It is important
to note that the Maintenance of Social Security Rights
Recommendation, 1983 (No.167) includes in annex
model provisions for the conclusion of bilateral or
multilateral social security instruments, as well as a
model agreement.
In principle, unless otherwise stated, all ILO instruments apply to migrant workers. In addition, several
specific instruments on migrant workers have been
adopted. These include, among others, the Migration
for Employment Convention, 1949 (No. 97), the Migrant
Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975
(No. 143), the Migration for Employment Recommendation (Revised), 1949 (No. 86) and the Migrant Workers
Recommendation, 1975 (No. 151). A number of instruments, including the Domestic Workers Convention,
2011 (No. 189), include provisions aimed specifically at
migrant workers.
Nevertheless, although a substantial array of instruments exists and many countries acknowledge the
importance of social protection, large numbers of
migrants and their families around the world continue
to face challenges in the effort to exercising their rights.
The ratification and enforcement of these international
instruments is an important step towards the provision
of more comprehensive protection to migrant workers.
This will, however, require strong political commitment
to making the right to social security a reality for all,
irrespective of an individual’s origin, race, gender, or
age.

61

62

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Bibliography
CEDAW (United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women). 1999.
General Recommendation No. 24 on Women and Health.
–––. 2008. General Recommendation No. 26 on Women Migrant Workers.
CESCR (UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights). 2000. General Comment No. 14:
The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health.
–––. 2008. General Comment No. 19: The Right to Social Security.
Diller, J.M. 2011. Securing Dignity and Freedom through Human Rights: Article 22 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff.
EC (European Commission). 2014. Migrant Access to Social Security and Healthcare: Policies and
Practice.
Hirose, Kenichi, Milos Nikač and Edward Tamagno. 2011. Social Security for Migrant Workers: A Rightsbased Approach. Geneva: ILO.
HRC (UN Human Rights Committee). 1986. General Comment No. 15: The Position of Aliens Under
the Covenant.
–––. 2009. General Comment No. 20: Non-Discrimination in Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2011. General Survey Concerning Social Security Instruments
in Light of the 2008 Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization. ILC.100/III(1B).
–––. 2013a. Extension of Social Protection of Migrant Domestic Workers in Europe.
–––. 2013b. Policy Brief No. 7: Social Protection for Low-Skilled Migrant Workers and their Families.
–––. 2015. Report of the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations.
ILC.104/(III(1A).
–––. 2016. General Survey Concerning the Migrant Workers Instruments: Report of the Committee
of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations (arts 19, 22 and 35 of the
Constitution). ILC.105/III(1A).
–––. 2017. World Social Protection Report 2017–19: Universal Social Protection to Achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
–––. 2019a. General Survey concerning the Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202),
ILC.108/III(B).
–––. 2019b. ILO Social Security Standards: Learn, Ratify and Apply. https://www.social-protection.org/
gimi/RessourcePDF.action?id=55196.
–––. 2020a. Protecting migrant workers during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Recommendations for Policymakers and Constituents. https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/labour-migration/publications/
WCMS_743268/lang--en/index.htm.

Chapter 2
Migrant workers’ right to social security and the international legal framework

–––. 2020b. Social Protection for Migrant Workers: A Necessary Response to the COVID-19 Crisis. https://
www.ilo.org/secsoc/information-resources/publications-and-tools/Brochures/WCMS_748979/
lang--en/index.htm.
–––. 2020c. ILO Standards and COVID-19 (Coronavirus). FAQ – Key Provisions of International Labour
Standards Relevant to the Evolving COVID-19 Outbreak. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/
public/---ed_norm/---normes/documents/genericdocument/wcms_739937.pdf.
–––. 2021 World Social Protection Report 2020–22: Social protection at the crossroads ‒ in pursuit
of a better future.
–––. n.d. How International Labour Standards are Created. http://www.ilo.org/global/standards/
introduction-to-international-labour-standards/international-labour-standards-creation/lang-en/index.htm.
–––. n.d. How International Labour Standards are Used. http://www.ilo.org/global/standards/
introduction-to-international-labour-standards/international-labour-standards-use/lang--en/
index.htm.
–––. n.d. The Benefits of International Labour Standards. http://www.ilo.org/global/standards/
introduction-to-international-labour-standards/the-benefits-of-international-labourstandards/lang--en/index.htm.
ISSA (International Social Security Association). 2014. Handbook on the Extension of Social Security
Coverage to Migrant Workers. https://ww1.issa.int/node/181888.
Kulke, U., M. Chichon and K. Pal. 2007. “Changing Tides: A revival of a Rights-based Approach to
Social Security”. The Right to Social Security, edited by Jef Van Langendonck. 13-32. Antwerp and
Oxford: Intersentia.
Kulke, Ursula. 2006. Filling the Gap of Social Security for Migrant Workers: ILO’s Strategy. Geneva: ILO.
Malcolm, D. (ed.). 2014. International Law, 4th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
OHCHR (Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights). 2005. The International
Convention on Migrant Workers and its Committee, Fact Sheet No. 24 (Rev.1). https://www.ohchr.
org/Documents/Publications/FactSheet24rev.1en.pdf

63

64

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

65

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and
multilateral social security agreements

66

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Key messages
► The conclusion of bilateral or multilateral social security agreements is one of the most effective and commonly
used policy options for extending social protection to migrant workers.
► These agreements are treaties designed to coordinate the social security schemes of two or more countries in
order to overcome barriers that might otherwise prevent migrant workers from receiving benefits under the
system of any of the countries in which they have worked.
► Social security agreements should contain provisions that embody the following key principles:
► equality of treatment between nationals and non-nationals;
► determination of the applicable legislation;
► maintenance of acquired rights and payment of benefits abroad;
► maintenance of rights in the course of acquisition (totalization);
► reciprocity; and
► mutual administrative assistance.
► While bilateral social security agreements between two parties are more common and can be easier and
faster to conclude, multilateral and regional agreements between three or more parties have the advantage
of setting common standards and rules for coordination in all of the States parties thereto.
► Bilateral and multilateral agreements are not mutually exclusive; they can be complementary and pursued
simultaneously.
► Since the aim of concluding social security agreements is primarily to enhance migrant workers’ social
protection, the choice between pursuing a bilateral or a multilateral agreement should be based on the best
interests of the workers and their families.
► Negotiating a social security agreement generally involves eight steps: (1) preliminary discussions; (2)
preparation of an initial draft of an agreement by one of the parties; (3) negotiations; (4) review of the agreed
text; (5) signing the agreement; (6) approving the agreement; (7) conclusion of an administrative agreement
and preparation of application forms; (8) entry into force of the agreement.
► Once an agreement has entered into force, its implementation involves three main tasks: (1) establishing
the administrative structures, the business processes and the roles and responsibilities for management of
the agreement; (2) putting in place information and communications technology (ICT)-based mechanisms,
particularly for exchanging data between institutions; and (3) applying the agreement using the aforementioned
mechanisms and ensuring ongoing communication between the liaison offices established therein.
► Social security agreements that are well designed and implemented effectively can contribute significantly to
realization of the right to social security for all.
► There are approximately 660 social security agreements worldwide (ISSA 2021).

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

►3.1 Introduction
Despite the existence of a clear international legal
framework governing the right to social security, this
right does not always translate into universal effective
access to healthcare and social security benefits for all
migrant workers around the world. On the contrary,
in many countries legal, administrative and other
obstacles hinder migrants’ access to social protection.
In order to overcome these obstacles, a variety of
policy options and measures are available to policymakers. The conclusion of social security agreements
is one of the most comprehensive and most commonly
used options for ensuring the coordination of social
security schemes and the portability of entitlements
and benefits. With rising levels of migration in recent
decades, more States are concluding such agreements,
yet their implementation and proper enforcement
remains challenging for many countries.
As this chapter will show, effective implementation
requires concrete operational mechanisms and close
collaboration between the institutions of the States
parties to the agreement, especially with regard to the
exchange of data (ISSA n.d.). Section 1 presents the
rationale for social security agreements, their objective
and the key elements that they should contain; section
2 provides current practices and examples, both
bilateral and multilateral; section 3 explains the process
of negotiating a social security agreement; and section
4 provides an overview of institutional, operational and
administrative considerations. The chapter draws on
several studies and guidance documents published by
the ILO and the ISSA and, in particular, Social Security
for Migrant Workers: A rights-based approach (ILO 2011).

►3.2 Bilateral and multilateral
agreements: rationale, key
elements and challenges
Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements
are treaties that are governed by international law
and are designed to coordinate the social security
schemes of two or more countries in order to
overcome, on a reciprocal basis, the barriers that
might otherwise prevent migrant workers from
receiving benefits under the system of any of the
countries in which they have worked (Hirose, Nikac
and Tamagno 2011, p.19).

3.2.1 Rationale
Today, most States are either destination, transit, or
origin countries; thus, a State may be the country of
origin of a large migrant population while hosting
workers from abroad. These cross-border movements
have an impact on migrant workers’ access to social
protection and coverage and on the State’s responsibility to ensure that they do not lose their acquired
entitlement to social protection benefits. Migrant
workers are among the most difficult groups to cover
as they move from one country to the other. Since
they often work in the informal economy, they may
not contribute to any social security scheme and may
thus not be eligible to benefit from them. Even migrant
workers who contribute to such schemes may not be
eligible for social protection benefits because they do
not meet the relevant legal requirements.
As discussed in Chapter 2, various ILO Conventions
and Recommendations,37 as well as the ILO Multilateral
Framework on Labour Migration (2006), call for the
conclusion of social security agreements as they are
essential to the coordination of social protection
benefits across countries, and thus to the enjoyment of
migrants’ rights to social protection.

► Box 3.1 The ILO Multilateral Framework on Labour Migration
The ILO Multilateral Framework on Labour Migration (2006) provides guidelines for a right-based approach
to labour migration and calls for the conclusion of social security agreements
► 9.9 entering into bilateral, regional or multilateral agreements to provide social security coverage and
benefits, as well as portability of social security entitlements, to regular migrant workers and, as appropriate, to migrant workers in irregular situation;
► 9.10 adopting measures to ensure that migrant workers and accompanying family members are provided
with health care and, at a minimum, with access to emergency medical care, and that regular migrant
workers and accompanying family members receive the same treatment as nationals with regard to the
provision of medical care […].
37

The Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No.118), the Maintenance of Social Security Rights Convention 1982 (No.157)
and the Maintenance of Social Security Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167).

67

68

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

This global recognition of the need to establish
mechanisms for the portability of social security
entitlements has been recognized more recently
in the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration, a non-binding intergovernmental agreement which embodies a common
approach to international migration and through
which States agree to help migrant workers of all skill

levels to access social protection in their countries of
destination and to ensure the portability of earned
benefits to their countries of origin or of future
employment. The Compact sets 23 objectives for
better managing migration at the local, national,
regional and global levels. Objective No. 22 deals with
the extension of social protection to migrant workers.

► Box 3.2 The Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
OBJECTIVE 22: Establish mechanisms for the portability of social security entitlements and earned benefits
To realize the commitment under objective 22, governments will draw from the following actions:
► a) Establish or maintain non-discriminatory national social protection systems, including social protection
floors for nationals and migrants, in line with the ILO Recommendation 202 on Social Protection Floors
► b) Conclude reciprocal bilateral, regional or multilateral social security agreements on the portability of
earned benefits for migrant workers at all skills levels, which refer to applicable social protection floors in
the respective States, applicable social security entitlements and provisions, such as pensions, healthcare
or other earned benefits, or integrate such provisions into other relevant agreements, such as those on
long-term and temporary labour migration
► c) Integrate provisions on the portability of entitlements and earned benefits into national social security
frameworks, designate focal points in countries of origin, transit and destination that facilitate portability
requests from migrants, address the difficulties women and older persons can face in accessing social
protection, and establish dedicated instruments, such as migrant welfare funds in countries of origin that
support migrant workers and their families.”
Source: UN 2018

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

3.2.2 Key elements of social security
agreements
Social security agreements may include any of the nine
branches38 of social security defined in the ILO’s flagship
Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention,
1952 (No. 102); the Recommendation on the Maintenance of Social Security Rights, 1983 (No. 167) offers a
model agreement in annex thereto.39 In practice, social
security agreements address the lack of coordination

between social security schemes through the inclusion
of provisions that enshrine the key principles40 of
equality of treatment, maintenance of rights in the
course of acquisition (totalization), maintenance of
acquired rights and payment of benefits abroad and
determination of applicable legislation.

► Box 3.3 Key principles promoted by ILO Conventions and Recommendations with regard to the
coordination of social security schemes and the protection of migrant workers
► Equality of treatment: Migrant workers should have, to the extent possible, the same rights and obligations
as nationals of the destination country with regard to social security coverage and social security benefits;
► Determination of the applicable legislation by establishing rules to ensure that migrant workers are governed
by the legislation of only one country at any given moment. An employed person should normally be subject
to the legislation of the country in which he or she is employed (principle of lex loci laboris). Exceptions to this
principle are sometimes made in the case of posted workers, self-employed migrant workers and temporary
migrant workers.
► Maintenance of acquired rights and provision of benefits abroad: Migrant workers who have acquired rights
in one territory should be guaranteed those rights in any of the States parties to the agreement. Under this
principle, benefits payable under the legislation of one State party should be paid abroad and should not be
subject to any restrictions (reduction, modification, suspension, cancellation, or confiscation) simply because
the person resides in the territory of another State party.
► Maintenance of rights in the course of acquisition (also referred to as totalization) provides for the accumulation of qualifying periods under different national social security schemes with a view to the aggregation or
totalization of periods of insurance, employment or residence that may be required for the acquisition, maintenance or recovery of rights and for sharing the costs of benefits paid.
► The provision of mutual administrative assistance ensures the coordination and the data and information
exchange required for the implementation of social security agreements.
In addition, reciprocity requires each States party to an agreement to apply the same mechanisms as the
other States parties in order to make its social security benefits more accessible to migrant workers. However,
reciprocity in bilateral agreements can also have a limiting effect, particularly for refugees (since they cannot
avail themselves of the protection of their countries of origin) and during negotiations where the social security
systems of two States parties to a bilateral agreement are at different stages of development.

38

These branches may cover both contributory and non-contributory benefits.

39

ILO n.d. “Social Protection for Migrant Workers”.

40

For an overview of the specific Conventions and Recommendations that promote these key social security principles, see Table 2.1.

69

70

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Social security agreements commonly include in their
first article or clause definitions of the main terms used
in the agreement. These definitions are agreed by the
parties during the negotiations and used throughout
the negotiation of the text and the administrative
arrangement. Thereafter, the agreement normally
includes a section establishing its personal and
material scope; the content may vary as to the category
of workers, branches or type of schemes (general or
specific) and benefits covered.

one agreement to another and may include a variety
of exceptions for different categories of workers and
situations (such as posted workers, temporary migrant
workers and international transport workers).

The content will also vary as to the key social security
principles enshrined therein (Box 3.3). For example,
there are a variety of potential apportionment and
calculation methods for the maintenance of rights in
the course of acquisition. With respect to determination
of the applicable legislation, the law of the country of
employment generally prevails. In practice, however,
provisions on the applicable legislation may vary from

Some countries have considered harmonizing their
national legal frameworks in order to fully align
their social protection systems rather than coordinating social security through agreements designed
to facilitate the portability of entitlements. However,
this approach ignores the substantial challenges of
harmonizing social security schemes across countries.

Social security agreements include provisions
establishing the competent authority – the ministry
or institution responsible for social security – and the
competent institutions and agencies in each of the
States parties.

► Table 3.1 Coordination vs. harmonization41
Coordination
of social protection systems
► “Coordination” means establishing mechanisms and
procedures to achieve mutually agreed objectives
while maintaining and respecting the rules and
definitions of each system.

► “Harmonization” means fully aligning different social
protection systems or replacing the definitions and
rules of one or both systems with common definitions
and rules.

► Coordination ensures that migrant workers and their
families can transfer, maintain and receive their social
protection entitlements or benefits when they move
from one country to another.

► While harmonization is theoretically feasible, the
practical and political challenges are enormous.

► It also establishes administrative links between
different social security systems.
► This is a tried and tested approach that has been widely
used for decades by countries around the world.

41

Harmonization
of social protection systems

Hirose, Nikac and Tamagno 2011, p.24.

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

3.2.3 Obstacles and challenges
Bilateral and multilateral agreements that are
implemented effectively and supported by administrative coordination, common databases and shared
information systems are essential to ensuring the
portability of social security entitlements and benefits.
Nonetheless, they present certain obstacles and
challenges.
For instance, the social security scheme of one State
party may be insufficiently developed, making it
problematic to conclude reciprocal agreements.
States may also lack the institutional and administrative capacity to provide social protection benefits
and implement the agreement. This disparity between
different social security systems, which often reflects
economic gaps between countries with different levels
of income, may lead to an unequal power balance
during negotiations.
Significant differences in social security schemes, for
example with regard to the design and level of benefits
(such as provident funds or social insurance schemes)
may pose a challenge for coordination between them.
Contrary to common belief, these challenges are not
insurmountable; Recommendation No. 167 provides
useful guidance in this regard.

3.2.4 Advantages and disadvantages
of bilateral and multilateral social
security agreements
International labour standards promote the
conclusion of multilateral and bilateral social security
agreements, both of which have advantages and
disadvantages. And while the conclusion of bilateral
agreements may be the basis or the starting point
for entering into a multilateral agreement, in some
regions the opposite is true. Complementary bilateral
and multilateral agreements may also co-exist.
Equal protection versus differences in protection.
Multilateral agreements set out equal protection
for migrant workers across all States parties while
bilateral agreements provide for protection that may
vary from one agreement to another. The greatest
benefit of a multilateral agreement is that it provides
common standards on social protection and rules for
coordinating the social security systems of all parties
thereto, ensuring, for example, that all specified
migrant workers who are nationals of one State party
have the same rights when working and residing in
another (ILO 2017, p. 42; Hirose, Nikac and Tamagno
2011, p. 38; Kulke 2006; and Holzmann, Koettl and

Chernetsky 2005). In the absence of a multilateral
agreement, migrant workers employed and residing
in a host country may have different rights depending
on whether the country of employment has entered
into a bilateral agreement with the migrant’s country
of origin and, if so, what that agreement covers. Thus,
migrant workers from country A who work and reside in
country B might be able to totalize contribution periods
for their pension benefits while migrant workers from
country C who work and reside in country B might not
have access to those benefits.
Uniformity of procedures and forms. Implementation and administration across States parties to
a multilateral agreement is facilitated by common
procedures and standard forms. If the same countries
conclude various bilateral agreements rather than a
single multilateral agreement, their procedures and
forms for each agreement will be different, complicating administration of the various instruments.
Time and complexity of the negotiations. Bilateral
agreements are considered more flexible and easier
and quicker to draft and negotiate than multilateral
instruments as there are fewer parties around the
negotiating table. An eight-step process is usually
necessary to the conclusion of a social security
agreement (see section 3.5). However, the complexity
and duration of that process can vary considerably
depending on the number of countries involved,
the political will of the parties, their experience in
concluding social security agreements, their social
security schemes, the number of branches included
in the agreement and the level of development of
their social security systems. Negotiations may take
less than a year in some cases and more than ten
years in others; for example, negotiations on the
Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) Multilateral
Agreement on Social Security began in 1994 and
the texts were ready and signed by 1997, but the
Agreement did not enter into force until 2005 owing
to delays in congressional approval. Irrespective of
the type of agreement, it is impossible to estimate
how much time will be required; however, bilateral
agreements usually involve three rounds of negotiations in addition to telephone and email exchanges.
Drafting and negotiating bilateral agreements before
embarking on a more comprehensive multilateral
agreement can help countries with little or no
history of negotiating and administering such instruments to gain valuable experience and knowledge.
On the other hand, regional dynamics, history and
politics can facilitate the negotiation of certain
multilateral agreements since “champion” countries
may encourage others to follow; solidarity and
common interests may foster cooperation between
neighbouring countries; a group effect may induce

71

72

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

more reluctant countries to adhere to a common
coordination framework; and some countries may
assume the role of facilitator or mediator to settle any
disputes that arise during the negotiations.
Since the aim of concluding social security agreements
is primarily to enhance migrant workers’ social
protection, the choice between pursuing a bilateral
or a multilateral agreement should be based on the
best interests of the workers and their families. Other
factors to take into consideration include political
will and support, institutional capacity, the existing
social security schemes and branches of the countries
concerned, feasibility, available time and negotiation
capacity. However, it is important to emphasize that
bilateral and multilateral agreements are not mutually
exclusive; countries can conclude both types of
agreement with the same countries. These agreements
may be complementary; for example, a bilateral
agreement might provide a higher level of protection by

enshrining more of the basic social security principles
or covering different branches or groups of migrant
workers, such as self-employed workers and domestic
workers. Most agreements include provisions stating
which agreement will prevail in the event of a conflict
between them; one such example is found in Article 5
of the ECOWAS General Convention on Social Security.
As many things may have changed since the signing of
the original agreements, a new bilateral or multilateral
agreement can also be negotiated to replace an old
one. For example, Argentina signed its first agreement
with Chile in 1971 and replaced it with a new one in
1996.
Ultimately the success of social security agreements,
whether bilateral or multilateral, will rely on effective
collaboration and exchange of information between
the social security institutions involved and on their
administrative and management capacities (see
section 4).

► Table 3.2 Bilateral vs. multilateral social security agreements
Bilateral social security agreements
► concluded between two countries;
► can result in different rights for migrant workers and
their families from different countries;
► easier to conclude than a multilateral agreement
although complex issues can arise;
► may be easier to coordinate and implement in practice
as there are only two parties involved.

Multilateral social security agreements
► concluded between three or more countries, often on
a regional basis;
► provide a uniform set of rules for all migrants who
have worked in the States parties and for their family
members;
► ensure freedom of movement and consistency with
the objectives of economic regions and trade agreements as they facilitate labour mobility within a (sub)
region
► can be more lengthy or complex to negotiate although
negotiations may also be facilitated by political
leverage to include more reluctant countries within a
region.

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

► Box 3.4 Portability of social security entitlements and earned benefits
ILO Conventions and Recommendations recognize and address the specific disadvantages faced by migrant
workers in accessing social security. They call for increased social security coordination between countries
through bilateral and multilateral agreements that provide for equality of treatment with the nationals of
the host country and appropriate arrangements for the maintenance of migrants’ acquired rights and rights
in the course of acquisition.
There is no internationally agreed definition of “portability” and none of the ILO Conventions and
Recommendation of relevance to migrants’ social protection define the term. it is not used in the Equality
of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No. 118), the Invalidity, Old-Age and Survivors’ Benefits
Convention, 1967 (No. 128), the Maintenance of Social Security Rights Convention, 1982 (No. 157), the Social
Security (Seafarers) Convention (Revised), 1987 (No. 165), the Migration for Employment Recommendation
(Revised), 1949 (No. 86) and the Maintenance of Social Security Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167));
only the Domestic Workers Recommendation, 2011 (No. 201) and the Employment and Decent Work for
Peace and Resilience Recommendation, 2017 (No. 205) as well as the ILO’s 2016 Guiding Principles on the
Access of Refugees and other Forcibly Displaced Persons to the Labour Market (para. 19) and Multilateral
Framework on Labour Migration (2006) refer to portability, but without clarifying or defining its meaning.
Some scholars use the term “portability” to describe measures aimed at the maintenance of acquired rights
and rights in the course of acquisition and the payment of benefits abroad (Holzmann et al. 2016; Taha,
Siegmann and Messkoub 2015).
The portability of earned benefits differs from the portability of social security; the former may be understood
to refer only to measures aimed at the maintenance of acquired rights and the payment of benefits abroad
while the latter has a broader meaning as it also refers to the maintenance of rights (or benefits) in the
course of acquisition and, depending on the authors, to the entire range of coordination principles.
Furthermore, it is important to distinguish between portability and exportability in the context of social
security rights and benefits. Like “portability”, the term “exportability” has no internationally agreed
definition. Scholars, including Taha, Siegmann and Messkoub (2015) and Sabates-Wheeler and Koettl (2010),
usually speak of the exportability of social security rights and benefits in reference to the maintenance of
acquired rights and the payment of benefits abroad. While portability requires cooperation between the
host and origin countries, exportability requires action on the part of only one country and the eligibility and
level of benefits paid are determined by the social security institution of this country.

73

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

74

3.2.5 The ISSA database on social
security agreements

provisions on posted workers and on the totalization of
benefits. Preliminary results reveal a steady increase in
the number of social security agreements signed, from
around 100 in 1980 to 660 in 2020. These trends are
common to all regions although the greatest number
of bilateral agreements have been signed in Europe,
followed in descending order by the Americas, Asia
and the Pacific and Africa. With regard to the branches
covered, almost 90 per cent of the agreements provide
for old-age, disability and survivors’ benefits while less
than 50 per cent include other branches.

Since 2018, the International Social Security Association
(ISSA) has been collecting information on existing social
security agreements worldwide, which will be made
publicly available through an online database that
will provide information on, among other things, the
number of social security agreements, the branches and
benefits covered and whether the agreements include

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

1960

1970

1980
1990
2000
Year of entry into force

2010

2020

Number of social security agreements

Number of social security agreements

Figure 3.2 Increase
the number
of bilateral
social
security of
agreements for each region,
► in
Figure
3.2 Increase
in the
number
► Figure 3.1 Change in the number of social
1960– 2020
bilateral
social
security
agreements
for
security agreements, 1955-2020
Figure 3.1 Change in the number of social security agreements, 1955-2020 each region, 1960– 2020

600
500
400
300
200
100
0

1960

1970

Europe

1980

1990

Americas

2000

Asia and the Paciﬁc

3.3. Branches
across
all bilateral
social agreements
security agreements
► FigureFigure
3.3. Branches
coveredcovered
across all
bilateral
social security
as at 2020as
at 2020

24%

Number of social security agreements

Unemployment
700

Family

600
500

Medical care

400

Maternity

300

Sickness

200

Work injury

100
0

36%
26%
42%
45%
52%
91%

Survivors
1960

1970

1980
1990
2000
Disability
Year of entry into force

2010

2020

89%
94%

Old-age
0%
Source: ISSA, 2021

Source: ISSA, 2021

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

2010
Africa

2020

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

►3.3 Bilateral social security
agreements
3.3.1 France – Tunisia42
As an important country of immigration, France has
concluded over 40 bilateral social security agreements
with non-EU countries with a view to ensuring better
coordination of social security schemes (EC 2014, p.9).
The France – Tunisia social security agreement, which
terminated in 1965 and was subsequently replaced by
another agreement in 2003,43 covers all branches of
social security (including sickness, maternity, family,
employment injury, old-age, invalidity and survivors’
benefits) with the exception of unemployment benefits.
It applies to salaried and self-employed workers,
certain categories of civil servants, dependents of
workers in these categories and “persons who are
not undertaking an activity as employed or self-employed” (Art. 2(1c)).44 By virtue of the principle of
equality of treatment, Tunisian workers in France are
entitled to the same social security benefits as French
citizens. With respect to the applicable legislation,
Tunisian workers in France are, in principle, subject to
French social security legislation. In the case of workers
who are employed in both France and Tunisia, the
agreement allows for membership in both countries’
social security regimes (Art. 5(1)). Tunisian workers who
are temporarily posted to France by their employer for
work purposes are subject to the legislation of Tunisia,
provided that the period of posting does not exceed
three years (Art. 5(2)). For Tunisian workers who have
worked in both States, maintenance of rights in the
course of acquisition is ensured through aggregation
of the contributions applicable in the territory of each
States party. Thus, insurance periods completed under
the other party’s legislation can be taken into account
for the purpose of qualifying for benefits. Under this
agreement, insurance periods of all contingencies
can be totalized except in the case of employment
injury benefits. The agreement also provides for the
portability of benefits to the territory of the other State

party. Hence, employment injury, old-age, survivors’
and invalidity benefits acquired while working in France
can be exported to Tunisia (EC 2014, p. 37).

3.3.2 Spain – Morocco45
Spain, another important EU immigration country, has
concluded over 20 bilateral social security agreements
with non-EU countries, including Ecuador, Mexico,
Morocco, the Philippines, Tunisia and Peru.46 An
important feature of these bilateral agreements is that
they guarantee equality of treatment with nationals as
regard to access to social security benefits. This means
that both healthcare and social security benefits should
be accessible by nationals and non-nationals under
the same conditions. One example is the agreement
signed with Morocco in 1979, which is comprehensive
in respect of the key social security principles and
branches and the groups of migrant workers covered.
It applies to workers who are or have been subject to
the social security legislation of either State and to their
dependents and survivors (Art. 3(1)). In addition, the
agreement covers all contingencies provided for under
the general social security scheme and includes specific
categories of workers covered by the special schemes
of Spain’s social security system, such as agricultural
workers, coal miners, seafarers, domestic workers and
self-employed workers (Art. 2(1A)).47

3.3.3 Canada – Mexico
The Agreement on Social Security between Canada
and Mexico48 is another example of a bilateral social
security agreement that incorporates the key social
security principles. It was concluded in 1996 with
the aim of improving the coordination of long-term
benefits under Canada’s Old Age Security Act49 and the
Canada Pension Plan.50 Mexican workers account for a
large proportion of Canada’s migrant workers, many
of them hired under the Seasonal Agricultural Workers
Program (SWAP). By virtue of the principle of equality
of treatment enshrined in the agreement, Mexican

42

This case study is a summary based on research conducted for Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017.

43

It is complemented by a general administrative arrangement of 26 November 2004, as amended by an administrative arrangement of 16
January 2008.

44

Original: “les personnes n’exerçant pas une activité salariée ou non salariée.“

45

This case study is a summary based on the research conducted for Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017.

46

Additional information is available at: http://www.seg-social.es/Internet_1/Normativa/index.htm?C1=1001andC2=2013.

47

In 2009, Spain also signed a bilateral social security agreement with Ecuador, which applies to all contributory benefits provided through
the Spanish social security system and covers all categories of workers with the exception of civil servants and members of the military
(Social Security Agreement between Spain and the Republic of Ecuador, Art. 2(1)(B)).

48

Agreement on Social Security between Canada and the United Mexican States, in force since 1 May 1996 (http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/
eng/regulations/SI-96-32/page-2.html). Article 4 provides for equality of treatment between nationals and non-nationals of the States
parties.

49

Old Age Security Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. O-9), available at: http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/O-9/.

50

Canada Pension Plan (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-8), available at: http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/C-8/.

75

76

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

workers are entitled to the same social security benefits
as those granted to Canadian citizens and permanent
residents. With regard to the portability of benefits,
the Agreement stipulates that the rights acquired
“shall not be subject to any reduction, modification,
suspension, cancellation or confiscation by reason only
of the fact that the person resides in the territory of
the other Party, and they shall be paid in the territory
of the other Party” (Art. 5(1)); thus, Mexican workers
can collect long-term benefits acquired in Canada after
their return to Mexico. In the event that they return
to a country other than Mexico, a similar provision
guarantees the payment of benefits in that country
under the same conditions and to the same extent as
nationals of Canada residing in that third State (Art.
5(2)). The Agreement includes provisions ensuring
the maintenance of acquired rights and rights in the
course of acquisition.

3.3.4 Malawi – Zambia51
The social security agreement between Zambia and
Malawi, concluded in 2003 in order to address the lack
of social protection of Malawian migrant workers in
Zambia, is the only instrument in the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) region that can be
described as a social security agreement. However,
it is not based on the principle of reciprocity since its
provisions cover only Malawian migrant workers in
Zambia, not Zambian migrant workers in Malawi. It
provides for the payment of benefits abroad, thus
allowing Malawians who have retired and returned to
Malawi to receive their benefits in their home country
rather than having to claim them in Zambia. The
agreement guarantees healthcare benefits, including
medical examinations, to temporary workers from
Malawi – which is particularly important for mine
workers – through the Zambian Workers Compensation Fund and includes coordination measures
such as visits from the social security officials of both
countries. It also provides for the establishment of a
Joint Permanent Commission of Cooperation and a
mechanism to facilitate the payment of social security
benefits through the Malawi High Commission in
Zambia.

3.3.5 Slovenia – Bosnia and
Herzegovina
The bilateral social security agreement between
Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, signed in 2007,
is a comprehensive instrument that covers several
branches of social security, including healthcare,
old age, disability, survivors’ pensions, occupational
injury and illness, unemployment insurance, parental
(including maternity leave) and child allowances. It
contains provisions on determination of the applicable
legislation, equality of treatment, the maintenance
of rights in the course of acquisition (totalization),
the maintenance of acquired rights and payment of
benefits abroad, and administrative coordination.
It also has provisions for posted workers, who are
subject to the legislation of the State party where the
employer is established if they stay for less than 48
months. Independent workers may remain subject to
the legislation of the State party in which they carry out
their activity if they stay for less than 24 months.
In an observation adopted in 2011, the CEACR found
that Slovenia’s application of the Agreement was not
in full compliance with Convention No. 97. Article 5 of
the Agreement raised issues with regard to equality
of treatment since the majority of migrant workers
from Bosnia and Herzegovina were prevented from
exercising their right to unemployment benefits
because they were not permanent residents. As a
result, the States parties amended the Agreement
in 2011, enabling migrant workers from Bosnia and
Herzegovina with temporary residence status to qualify
for unemployment benefits in Slovenia.

3.3.6 India – Japan52
One of the difficulties in negotiating bilateral
agreements on social security arises where the States
parties have different social security systems, as in
the case of India and Japan. While India has a national
system that includes the Employee’s Provident
Fund (EPF), the Employee’s Pension Scheme (EPS)
and deposit-linked insurance scheme.53 Japan has
a social insurance system based on, among other
plans, a national pension programme with a flat-rate

51

Mpedi and Nyenti, 2017.

52

For more information, see the Japan Pension Service website (https://www.nenkin.go.jp/international/english/international/notesindia.
html) and the India Ministry of External Affairs website (https://www.mea.gov.in/bilateral-documents.htm?dtl/26465/Social_Security_
Agreements).

53

See the SSA-ISSA Country Profile of India, available at: https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/2018-2019/asia/india.pdf.

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

benefit and a pension insurance programme with
an earnings-related benefit.54 Differences between
national social security systems present a coordination
challenge with respect to, among other things, the
totalization of contribution periods.
Notwithstanding these differences, India and Japan
signed a bilateral social security agreement in 2012 with
entry into force as from 2016. The agreement seeks to
ensure that migrant workers do not pay social security
contributions twice. It covers old-age, disability, and
survivors’ pensions and provides for determination
of the applicable legislation, equality of treatment,
totalization of contribution periods, payment of
benefits abroad and administrative collaboration. It is
not a reciprocal agreement as the benefits provided by
the two countries differ. The agreement also stipulates
that in order to remain covered under the national social
security system of the home country, employees must
obtain a Certificate of Coverage and claim exemption
from the host country’s social security legislation. The
agreement regulates the situation of posted workers
and provides that the Certificate of Coverage can be
obtained for up to five years and may be extended for
a maximum of three more years, provided the relevant
authorities of the two countries agree. The crews of
ships and aircraft are also regulated. Self-employed
workers are not included in the agreement as India
has no mandatory pension system for this category of
workers.
With regard to the Indian pension system, it is
worth noting that for purposes of the totalization of
pension benefits, the agreement does not apply to
the EPF, which pays a lump-sum benefit at the time
of retirement. The EPF, is however, subject to the
provisions on the avoidance of dual coverage and on
the payment of benefits. More specifically, Japan’s
old-age pension system requires 25 years of coverage;
the coverage periods of workers who do not meet this
requirement may be aggregated, provided that there
are no overlapping periods between the two countries.
On the other hand, the EPS requires a coverage period
of ten years and allows workers who do not meet this
requirement to add their periods of coverage under
the Japanese pension system provided, once again,
that there are no overlapping periods. Workers whose
aggregated period of coverage in India and Japan is

less than ten years are entitled to a lump-sum benefit
under the EPS but may not totalize their EPS coverage
period where the related benefits have already been
paid.
In addition to old-age benefits, the agreement
authorizes the early withdrawal of EPF contributions
paid by Japanese workers in India upon completion
of assignment with the possibility of a direct refund
deposited in their foreign bank accounts.

3.3.7 Moldova – various countries55
In 2016, the ISSA recognized the Republic of Moldova’s
National Office of Social Insurance for its good practices
in social security and awarded it a Certificate of Merit
based on its extension of coverage to migrant workers
through the conclusion of bilateral social security
agreements with the main destination countries of
Moldovans working abroad. In 2019, the country had
close to 626,000 emigrants (UNDESA 2019).
Moldova has signed agreements on pension rights
with other members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), including Belarus, Russia,
Ukraine and Uzbekistan in 1995 and Azerbaijan
in 1997. It has also signed bilateral social security
agreements with 13 European countries: Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Germany, Hungary, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Poland,
Portugal, Romania and Turkey.
Under these agreements, Moldovan migrant workers
are entitled to the same rights, obligations and
social security benefits as the nationals of these
countries, including the right to receive their foreign
pensions when they return home. The agreements
include determination of the applicable legislation,
totalization of contribution periods and payment of
benefits abroad; most of them cover old age, invalidity
and survivors’ benefits and some also provide for
sickness, maternity, occupational injury and disease,
unemployment and family benefits.
The ILO provided technical support through the
Republic of Moldova: Building Capacity for Coordination
of Social Security for Migrant Workers project, which

54

See the SSA-ISSA Country Profile of Japan, available at: https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/2018-2019/asia/japan.pdf.

55

For more information, see the ISSA and ILO project webpage (https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/labour-migration/projects/
WCMS_232848/lang--en/index.htm).

77

78

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

sought to improve the social security entitlements
of Moldovan migrant workers by enhancing the
Government’s capacity for the negotiation, adoption
and implementation of bilateral social security
agreements. The project helped to improve the impact
of migration on development and on poverty reduction
by entitling Moldovan migrant workers and their
families to social security benefits. During the project’s
timeframe (2009–2011), the country signed four of the
aforementioned 13 social security agreements (with
Bulgaria, Luxembourg, Portugal and Romania) and
two administrative arrangements56 (with Bulgaria and
Portugal). In addition, negotiations were completed
with five more countries and preliminary steps were
taken with two countries (Austria and Estonia).

3.3.8 United States of America –
various countries
Agreements signed by the US are statutorily mandated
to be solely bilateral and to be concluded only with
countries that have social security systems similar to
its own (sect. 233 of the Social Security Act). The US
has concluded 28 totalization57 agreements since 1978:
18 with EU members (Austria, Belgium, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain and Sweden) and
ten with non-European countries (Australia, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Japan, Norway, the Republic of Korea,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and Uruguay).58
These agreements provide for old-age pensions and
survivors’ and disability benefits but do not apply to
Medicare, the US health insurance programme. They
cover US citizens and residents employed abroad by a
US employer or one of its foreign affiliates, regardless
of the duration of the assignment. Employees of foreign
affiliates of a US employer are, however, only covered
under US social security if the employer has entered
into an agreement with the US Treasury Department
(sect. 3121 (I) of the Internal Revenue Code).
While all of these totalization agreements have
common features, the complexity of and variations
in the signatory countries’ social security laws make
each agreement unique. However, the principle of
applicable legislation governs every agreement and
provides that migrant workers are subject to the social
security law of the country in which they are working.
If the services are performed in the United States, US

law mandates compulsory social security coverage for
regular migrant workers, regardless of their citizenship,
country of residence and length of stay. With the
exception of the agreement with Italy, all of them
include an exception for posted workers, who remain
covered only by the country from which they were
sent and are exempt from the obligation to contribute
to the social security system of the host country for
a maximum of five years. Self-employed workers are
also covered under most totalization agreements, but
their situation varies under each of them.
The agreements allow migrant workers who have not
met all of the basic requirements for social benefits
under one country’s system to totalize (aggregate)
their US and foreign entitlements, provided that the
worker has at least six credits (approximately one
and a half years of work in total) under the U.S social
security system, and to qualify for a partial benefit in
the US based on the proportion of the worker’s total
career spent in the country of payment. Similarly,
workers may need to make a minimum contribution
under another country’s system in order for their US
benefits to be aggregated for purposes of foreign
benefit requirements.

►3.4 Multilateral social security
agreements
3.4.1 Andean Community (CAN)
Instrument on Social Security
The CAN is a South American regional body comprising
Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru. During the
creation and development of the Andean South
Market, social protection for migrant workers was
considered critical to labour migration in the region. In
2004, CAN Member States approved Decision No. 583,
which replaced previous instruments on social security.
The Ibero-American Social Security Organization
(OISS) supported the adoption of the Decision No.
583, which was based on the EU regulations on social
security and the MERCOSUR Multilateral Agreement. In
fact, the Instrument’s provisions were designed to be
equivalent to the MERCOSUR Multilateral Agreement.
The contingencies covered include healthcare, old age,
survivorship and disability. Posted and self-employed
workers are not included. The Instrument is a
complement to the previously adopted Decision No.
545 on Andean labour migration.

56

For more information on administrative arrangements, see section 3.5 under “Step 7”.

57

As stated above, the maintenance of rights in the course of acquisition is also referred to as “totalization”: the accumulation of qualifying
periods under different national security schemes with a view to the aggregation (or totalization) of insurance, employment or residence
periods required for the acquisition, maintenance or recovery of rights and for sharing the costs of benefits paid.

58

For more information, see the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) website (https://www.ssa.gov).

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

According to the transitional provisions of Decision
No. 583, implementing regulations for the Instrument
were to be adopted within six months of the Decision’s
issuance, but this has yet to be done. As a result, the
Instrument cannot be effectively applied by CAN
Member States. Decision No. 545 is also in need of
implementing regulations.

3.4.2 Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) Agreement on Social
Security
The CARICOM Agreement on Social Security was
signed in 1996 with entry into force as from 1997. It
applies to 13 of the 15 CARICOM Member States59 and
to the five CARICOM associate members from British
Overseas Territories.60 In pursuit of CARICOM’s goal
of facilitating labour migration within the region, the
instrument seeks to ensure that nationals of CARICOM
countries and territories and their family members have
access to social protection benefits while working in
another CARICOM country or territory. The Agreement
was signed with a view to harmonizing these States’
social security legislation in order to promote regional
cooperation, coordination, unity and integration.
The Agreement makes explicit reference to ILO
Conventions in its preamble and is based on the
principles of equality of treatment for residents of
CARICOM Member States under their national social
security systems; maintenance of rights acquired
(with payment of benefits abroad) or in the course
of acquisition (including totalization of contribution
periods); protection and maintenance of such rights,
regardless of any change of residence among the
respective countries; and administrative assistance.
It follows the model provisions for the conclusion of
multilateral social security agreements, contained in
annex to the ILO Maintenance of Social Security Rights
Recommendation, 1983 (No 167).
The instrument covers invalidity, disability, old-age
and survivors’ pensions and death benefits. It applies
to insured migrant workers who are or have been
subject to the national legislation of one or more

CARICOM Member States (generally the legislation of
the State in which they work) and to their dependants
and survivors, regardless of nationality. Its provisions
also establish the applicable legislation, including for
certain categories of insured persons (such as posted
workers; the staff of diplomatic missions, consulates
and international organizations; and seafarers). In
the case of self-employed workers who reside in a
CARICOM State other than the one in which the services
are provided, the Agreement provides for application
of the legislation of the former State unless otherwise
stipulated in the latter’s legislation. Benefits are paid in
the currency of the host country. The instrument also
includes provisions on the settlement of disputes.

3.4.3 Inter-African Conference on
Social Insurance (CIPRES) Multilateral
Convention on Social Security
CIPRES comprises 16 French-speaking countries61 in
West and Central Africa and the Indian Ocean.62 Its
Multilateral Convention on Social Security was adopted
in February 2006 in order to better protect the social
security rights of migrant workers in the region.
The Convention63 covers all workers, members of
their families and their survivors who are nationals of
a State party to the Convention and are or have been
subject to the social security scheme of any of the
parties. It includes both in-cash and in-kind benefits
and provides for old age, disability, death, employment
injury, maternity, sickness and family benefits under
all statutory social security schemes.64 Its Preamble
affirms the principles of equality of treatment with
the nationals of the host country and maintenance of
acquired rights and rights in the course of acquisition.
The Convention’s ratification by Senegal, one of
the main migrant-receiving countries of the region
(together with Gabon and Cameroon), in 2014 was an
important milestone in ensuring enhanced access to
social security benefits for migrant workers in these
countries.

59

Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Granada, Guyana, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Trinidad and Tobago, but not Suriname or Haiti.

60

Anguilla, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Turks and Caicos and the British Virgin Islands.

61

Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Madagascar, Mali, the Niger, Senegal and Togo.

62

For more information, see: http://www.lacipres.org/.

63

http://www.lacipres.org/presentation/article/traite.

64

For more information, see: http://www.lacipres.org/prevoyance-sociale/article/prevoyance-sociale-en-afrique.

79

80

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

3.4.4 Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) General
Convention on Social Security
Because the ECOWAS Member States65 adopted the
General Convention on Social Security in 2012 as a
Supplementary Act to the revised ECOWAS Treaty
(1993), it does not require ratification. It replaces all
previous social security conventions between ECOWAS
Member States with the exception of more advantageous bilateral and multilateral agreements.
The Convention is based on ILO Conventions No.118
and No.157; the ECOWAS Treaty and its Protocol
on Free Movement of Persons (1993), the Right of
Residence and Establishment (1979) and supplementary protocols thereto; and the African Union
Migration Policy Framework for Africa (2006). The
establishment of the Convention was intended to
enhance the effective implementation of the ECOWAS
Free Movement Protocols in Member States and to
better coordinate their national social security systems.
The Convention applies to migrant workers who are
nationals of any ECOWAS Member State and who are
or have been subject to the legislation of one or more
of those States; their family members and survivors;
and refugees and stateless persons who have acquired
social security rights in the territory of an ECOWAS
Member State and are residents thereof. It covers all
nine social security branches and applies to general
and special compulsory social insurance schemes,
including employers’ contributions and provident fund
schemes.
It also includes all of the key social security principles:
non-discrimination and equality of treatment between
nationals and non-nationals of any ECOWAS Member
State; maintenance of acquired rights (with payment of
benefits abroad in the currency of the country in which
the migrant works or resides); maintenance of rights in
the course of acquisition (totalization of employment
or contribution periods); and determination of the
applicable legislation. With a few exceptions, such as
posted and international transport workers, migrant
workers are subject to the legislation of the country
in which the service is provided. In terms of administrative assistance, ECOWAS Member States must
share information on measures taken with a view to
application of the Convention and on their legislation
and legal reforms, as well as statistical information on
beneficiaries and the amount of the benefits provided

under the Convention. Their authorities and institutions must assist one another as if they were applying
their own legislation.
The Convention also established the Committee
of Experts on Social Security, whose tasks include
handling all administrative matters concerning and
questions arising from its application and fostering and
developing cooperation between States parties with
regard to social security for migrant workers and their
families. It establishes a mechanism for the settlement
of disputes between ECOWAS Member States
concerning the interpretation or application of the
Convention: initial negotiations, followed by arbitration
by a jointly appointed body of three ECOWAS Member
States (Art. 53). The Administrative Arrangements
annexed to the Convention set out detailed procedures
for its application.

3.4.5 The European Union Experience
The EU rules on coordination of social security apply to
all 27 EU Member States, as well as Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland66, and cover all nine
branches of social security. They are based on two
main legal instruments, both of which came into force
in 2010: Regulation (EC) No. 883/2004 [EU 2004]; and
Regulation (EC) No. 987/2009 [EU 2009], also known
as the ‘Implementing Regulation’. These instruments
replaced previous regulations, including Regulation No.
1408/71 and its Implementing Regulation No. 574/72,
and any other social security convention applicable
between EU Member States who fall under these new
regulations (with some exceptions, detailed in Annex
II to Regulation (EC) No. 883/2004). While the EU rules
are legally binding regulations, they do not replace or
harmonize national social security systems but provide
for their coordination.
The right to social security is also established in
Article 34 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union (2000), which states that “[e]veryone
residing and moving legally within the European
Union is entitled to social security benefits and social
advantages in accordance with Union law and national
laws and practices”.
These rules constitute one of the most extensive
multilateral social security agreements in terms of

65

ECOWAS has 15 Member States: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cote d’Ivoire, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Liberia, Mali,
Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo.

66

With regard to the United Kingdom, two agreements with provisions on social security entitlements were signed in 2020. These
agreements safeguard previously-acquired social security benefits and those in the course of acquisition and, with some exceptions,
extend them beyond 30 December 2020. For more information see: Questions and Answers on the United Kingdom’s withdrawal (europa.eu), FAQ
- Brexit (cleiss.fr).

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

scope, not only because of the number of countries
involved (32) but because they cover several categories
of migrants and their families when moving within
Europe:
► nationals of EU Member States, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland who are
or have been insured in one of these countries, as
well as their family members;
► stateless persons and refugees residing in the EU
Member States, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and
Switzerland who are or have been insured in one
of these countries, as well as their family members
and survivors (Regulation (EC) No 883/2004, Art. 2).
► nationals of non-EU countries, with the exception
of Denmark, who legally reside in the territory of
the EU and have moved between these countries,
and members of their families (Regulation (EU)
1231/2010).
With the exception of certain specified schemes, the
regulations apply to both general and special social
security schemes, whether contributory or non-contributory, including schemes based on employer
liability and some forms of social assistance (Art. 3).
Each Member State coordinates only the benefits
provided under its own legislation; States are not
required to introduce all of the benefits set out in
Article 3 if their national social security system does
not include them. Thus, a migrant who had worked in
three countries would receive three separate old-age
pensions.67 Article 10 prevents the overlapping of
benefits. An example of coverage is the European
Health Insurance Card (EHIC), which entitles people
staying in an EU country other than their country of
residence to receive medical benefits during that stay
on the same terms and at the same cost as the people
insured in that country. Nationals of third countries are
also covered except in Denmark, Iceland, Lichtenstein,
Norway and Switzerland.68
The EU regulations contain detailed provisions giving
effect to the principles of equality of treatment, maintenance of acquired rights and rights in the course of
acquisition and portability of benefits. Most of the
provisions determining the applicable legislation are

based on the principle of lex loci laboris, under which
migrant workers are subject to the legislation of the
Member State in which they work. A few cases, such
as posted workers and self-employed persons, are
exempt from this rule.69 With regard to equality of
treatment between third-country nationals (nationals
of non-EU countries70) and EU nationals, a period of
residence may be required but should be no longer
than five years pursuant to EU Directive 109/2003.
Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 includes a reference to the
principle of good administration, which establishes a
duty to share information and to cooperate in ensuring
proper implementation of the regulation. It also
establishes an Administrative Commission to interpret
the provisions of the Regulation, promote cooperation
between Member States and facilitate cross-border
cooperation activities. The Electronic Exchange of Social
Security Information (EESSI), an IT system database,
was introduced in order to help Member States’ social
security institutions to exchange information more
rapidly and securely. In the past, most exchanges were
paper-based but since July 2019, all Member States
have been required to finalize their implementation of
the database and connect their social security institutions to the cross-border electronic exchanges.

3.4.6 Ibero-American Multilateral
Convention on Social Security
In 2007, Spain and Portugal signed the Ibero-American
Multilateral Convention on Social Security with 13 Latin
American countries; the number of States parties had
increased to 15 by 2020. However, the Convention is
operational only in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Spain, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal,
the Dominican Republic and Uruguay. Where bilateral
social security agreements between two States parties
are in place, the provisions more favourable to the
interested party apply. The Convention, which replaces
a network of social security agreements among Latin
American countries, covers the following contingencies:
employment injury, old age, death and invalidity. It
provides for equality of treatment, and for application
of the principles of maintenance of acquired rights and
rights in the course of acquisition.

67

For more information, see https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=860andlangId=en.

68

These regulations were also applicable to the United Kingdom until the end of the transition period (December 2020). https://ec.europa.
eu/social/main.jsp?catId=470andlangId=en).

69

Posted workers may remain subject to the social security system of the country from which they are sent, provided that the duration
of the work does not exceed two years and that they are not sent to replace other workers who have completed their posting. Similar
exceptions apply to self-employed workers.

70

Nationals of non-EU countries are not covered by the EU regulations.

81

82

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Several steps were taken to ensure effective
implementation of the Convention. In March 2012, an
Administrative Technical Committee was established,
as provided in the Convention, to facilitate harmonized
implementation on matters relating to administrative
issues, ICTs, data exchange and the regular modernization of procedures. Separate technical committees
on economic benefits and pensions, health, work
injury, social services and pension funds were also
established.71

3.4.7 MERCOSUR Multilateral
Agreement on Social Security
The MERCOSUR Multilateral Agreement on Social
Security and its implementing regulations were signed
in 1997 and entered into force in 2005, replacing
previous bilateral agreements between the founding
MERCOSUR States: Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and
Uruguay. It did not involve changes in national
social security systems, most of which were public
and contributory with a few individual capitalization
systems. The Agreement seeks to integrate MERCOSUR
Members’ social security systems through coordination mechanisms that guarantee workers’ access to
social protection when moving between MERCOSUR
States. It covers the healthcare, old age, disability and
survivors’ benefits that each country provides under its
national law.
The Agreement plays a key role in facilitating labour
migration while ensuring migrants’ rights and is thus
an exemplary case of application of the social security
principles established in ILO Conventions:
► The principles of equality of treatment and non-discrimination are expressly incorporated. Indeed,
the Agreement recognizes migrant workers’ right
to social protection while performing services
within any MERCOSUR Member State, a right

that extends to their families and dependants,
regardless of nationality (Art. 2.1).
► The principle of applicable legislation also applies.
Migrant workers are subject to the national
legislation of the country in which the service is
provided, except for a few cases set out in Article
5 (posted workers; the staff of diplomatic missions,
consulates and international organizations; and
seafarers), who are exempt from the payment of
contributions in the host country for up to two
years. Self-employed workers are not covered
under the Agreement.
► Maintenance of workers’ acquired rights and
rights in the process of acquisition is ensured.
The Agreement requires a 12-month minimum
contribution period in a country before residency
is changed to another country. As a rule, paying
into the social security system of one MERCOSUR
country for a period greater than 12 months counts
towards the vesting of long-term benefits in any of
the other Member States. Where a worker’s total
contribution period is less than 12 months, the
State in which contributions were paid may decide
whether to pay benefits. Non-overlapping periods
during which insurance premiums or contributions are paid in any of the MERCOSUR Member
States are considered for purposes of benefit entitlement. The Agreement even permits the totalization of benefits earned in a third State, provided
that it has an agreement on social security with
any MERCOSUR State . If only one MERCOSUR
State has such an agreement with a third State,
the former must recognize the worker’s service
as rendered within its own territory for totalization
purposes. Benefits are paid on a pro rata temporis
basis; in other words, each MERCOSUR Member
State calculates the benefit amount based on the
applicable rate and the length of the contribution
period in each country.

► Box 3.5 ILO project: Extending access to social protection and portability of benefits to
migrant workers and their families in selected Regional Economic Communities (RECs) in
Africa
Project web page: https://www.ilo.org/africa/technical-cooperation/WCMS_646607/lang--en/index.htm
ECOWAS: A Capacity-building toolkit, available at: https://www.itcilo.org/en/areas-of-expertise/labour-migration/ecowas
ILO 2019, Social Protection for Migrant Workers and their families in ECOWAS States https://www.ilo.org/
wcmsp5/groups/public/---africa/documents/publication/wcms_714335.pdf
71

For more information, see: http://www.sisalril.gov.do/pdf/publicaciones/BIOISS_N_49_especial_congreso.pdf.

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

Not only has the Agreement reduced the legal barriers
to migrant workers’ access to social protection in their
host countries; it has also improved administrative
coordination and the delivery of benefits between
MERCOSUR Member States through:
► implementation, in 2008, of a Data Transfer and
Validation System (DTVS) (ISSA 2009) administered
by the OISS. This System has greatly facilitated
the transfer, recording and verification of social
security data on workers in MERCOSUR Member
States and has improved not only the security of
the pension application process and the payment
of retirees’ benefits, but also the efficiency of these
processes by significantly reducing waiting time
and paperwork (ISSA 2014). The system is bilingual
(Spanish and Portuguese).
► the introduction of a system for the payment of
benefits in the local currency of the country in
which the migrant worker resides, avoiding the
extra costs associated with currency exchange and
banking fees.
► creation of the Multilateral Standing Committee
on Social Security (COMPASS), which advises the
relevant authorities, interprets the provisions and
implementation of the Agreement and takes decisions by consensus.

3.4.8 Southern African Development
Community (SADC) frameworks and
policies on social security
The SADC has established non-binding frameworks
such as the 2003 Charter of the Fundamental Social
Rights in SADC (the Social Charter), which seeks to
establish and harmonize social protection schemes,
and, in 2007, the Code on Social Security in the SADC.
The Code seeks “to provide SADC and Member States
with an effective instrument for the coordination,
convergence and harmonization of social security
systems in the region” (Art. 3.3) and calls on them to
“work towards the free movement of persons” (Art.
17.1),“ensure the facilitation of exportability of benefits,
including the payment of benefits in the host country”
(Art. 17.2(d)) and ensure that migrant workers can
“participate in the social protection security schemes
of the host country [and] enjoy equal treatment” (Art.
17.2(a) and (b)).

72

In 2015, in the context of implementation of the
SADC Regional Indicative Strategic Development
Plan (RISDP), the SADC Employment and Labour
Sector adopted an Employment and Labour Protocol.
The Heads of States and Government approved the
Protocol and it is now open for ratification by the
Member States, after which it will be binding.72 Article 19
of the Protocol focuses on labour migration and states
that “States parties shall endeavour to […] ensure that
fundamental rights are accorded to non-citizens, in
particular labour/employment and social protection
rights; […] harmonise national migration legislation
and policies; and adopt a regional migration policy
in accordance with international conventions […]”.
As part of this regional migration policy, States must
“adopt measures to facilitate the coordination and
portability of social security benefits, especially through
the adoption of appropriate bilateral and multilateral
agreements providing for equality of treatment of
non-citizens, aggregation of insurance periods, maintenance of acquired rights and benefits, exportability of
benefits and institutional cooperation” (Art. 19(f)). In
addition, provision is made for the establishment of an
autonomous regional agency to address issues such
as the streamlining and facilitation of the portability of
social protection benefits across borders.
In May 2016, the SADC Minsters of Employment and
Labour adopted the non-binding SADC Regional Policy
Framework on the Portability of Accrued Social Security
Benefits. More recently, the Employment and Labour
Sector (ELS) Ministers and the social partners proposed
pilot sectors (mining, agriculture and financial services)
and countries and commissioned three studies to
inform a portability framework for the SADC region.
In May 2019, the SADC Member States and the social
partners agreed on a roadmap towards a binding
instrument on the coordination and portability of
social security benefits. The proposed instrument
was prepared with ILO support and discussed at a
meeting of the ELS-Joint Tripartite Technical Subcommittees in November 2019. The draft instrument then
evolved into the Guidelines on Portability of Social
Security Benefits in SADC (SADC 2018), endorsed at a
March 2020 meeting of the ELS Ministers and the social
partners. The Member States undertook to implement
these Guidelines through bilateral and multilateral
arrangements and Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, South
Africa and Zimbabwe volunteered to pilot their
implementation. The Guidelines should facilitate the
coordination of national social security schemes within

By 2018, nine member States had signed the Protocol but none had ratified it. In 2020, the development of a draft protocol on employment
and labour was approved by the Heads of States and Government and the social partners in order to expedite the development of a
coordinated and harmonized regional labour market. For more information, see https://www.tralac.org/images/docs/12814/2018-sadcels-draft-record.pdf and https://www.sadc.int/files/1815/8365/4970/EMPLOYMENT_AND_LABOUR_MEETING_MEDIA_STATEMENT.pdf.

83

84

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

the SADC in order to progressively overcome the
barriers that prevent migrant workers and members of
their families from receiving benefits under the social
security systems of any of the countries in which they
have worked.73

3.5.2 The negotiation process

Negotiation processes vary in length, content and
intention. The ILO has often been requested to support
the negotiation and development of multilateral or
bilateral social security agreements. Based on the
Organization’s experience and that of experts and
former negotiators, an eight-step process that can
be of use to any country that wishes to negotiate or
renegotiate a social security agreement has been
identified and is generally followed. At each step, the
key elements to be discussed and negotiated are
highlighted. This list is not exhaustive and should be
adapted to the specific situation and context.

During the negotiations, countries should bear in
mind that these instruments aim to coordinate the
social security schemes of different countries. They
are designed to eliminate barriers that might prevent
migrant workers and their families from receiving
social benefits under the system of any of the countries
in which they have worked, and to ensure that migrant
workers do not have to contribute to multiple social
security systems for the same work. These agreements
are often based on or guided by the overarching
principle of reciprocity, meaning that the negotiating
countries agree to apply the same mechanisms and
assume a reasonable comparability of obligations.
Reciprocal agreements may also reflect an unequal
power balance between the two negotiating parties.
Even in such cases, the social security agreement
should seek to ensure the greatest possible equality
of treatment, thus reflecting the basic principles of
equality and non-discrimination that are enshrined in
human rights instruments and international labour
standards.

3.5.1 Prior to the negotiation process

An eight-step process

Before entering into negotiations on a social security
agreement with another country, governments
should gather the relevant social, economic and policy
information on migration and social protection in
their own country and in the country with which they
seek to negotiate in order to establish their negotiating position beforehand. For instance, data on
migrant stocks and migration flows between the two
countries, including the demographics of the migrant
populations, should be considered. Each negotiating
partner should also examine its counterpart’s record
of ratification of international instruments on social
security for migrant workers and the social security
agreements that it has concluded. Lastly, governments
should decide which specific social security benefits
they might be willing to negotiate, their material and
personal scope and the extent to which they recognize
the principle of equality of treatment.

Negotiating a social security agreement generally
involves eight steps: (1) preliminary discussions; (2)
preparation of an initial draft agreement by one of
the parties; (3) negotiations; (4) review of the agreed
text; (5) signing the agreement; (6) approving the
agreement; (7) conclusion of the administrative
arrangement and preparation of application forms;
and (8) entry into force of the agreement. Each of
these steps will be discussed in greater depth in the
following subsections.

►3.5 How to negotiate a social
security agreement

73

Discussions and documents shared within the framework of the ILO project, “Extending access to social protection and portability of
benefits to migrant workers and their families in selected Regional Economic Communities (RECs) in Africa” (see Box 3.5).

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

Figure 3.4 An eight-step process
► Figure 3.4 An eight-step process

1

8
AN

Preliminary discussions

2

STEP
PROCESS
8

6
7

Preparation of the initial draft agreement

3

Negotiations

4

Review of the agreed text

5

Signing the agreement
Approving the agreement

Conclusion of administrative arrangement
and application forms

Entry into force of the agreement

► Step 1. Preliminary discussions
Preliminary discussions are often based on informal
meetings or email exchanges between technical
social security experts working in the relevant
ministry or social security institution of each country.
The composition of the delegation depends on
the branches to be negotiated. When a country
has several pension schemes, such as provincial or
sectoral, there should still only be one negotiator
to deal with the international agreement and then
internal coordination. Usually someone from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs is also involved. These
discussions involve exchanging information on the
countries’ respective national social security systems,
particularly the branches of social security for which
each country has schemes in place; the personal and
material scope of its legislation; its eligibility requirements for benefits; and any other information that will
allow other countries to understand its social security
system. The exclusion of specific branches of social
security from the draft agreement should be explained
by the experts of each country. Preliminary discussions are also an opportunity for countries to inform
each another of their preferences for application of
the five key principles of social security agreements
(Box 3.3). The experts normally explain their countries’
procedure for concluding social security agreements,

discuss the time frame for negotiating the next steps
and decide which country will prepare the initial draft
of the agreement or whether they will each prepare a
draft.
► Step 2. Preparation of an initial draft agreement
A country’s delegation often comprises technical
officials from its Ministries of Health, Labour, Welfare,
Social Protection, Social Affairs and Foreign Affairs
and/or other government agencies and social security
institutions and may include representatives of the
tripartite boards of concerned social security funds.
The team involved in the negotiations is usually the
same as the one involved in the preliminary discussions. Preparation of the initial draft agreement is the
starting point of the negotiations and if the negotiating countries have not agreed as to which country
will prepare the draft, they should do so at this stage.
Where this is not possible, an exchange of correspondence may be initiated.
The draft should reflect the countries’ preferences as to
which of the five key social security principles (equality
of treatment, maintenance of acquired rights, payment
of benefits abroad (export of benefits), determination
of the applicable legislation, maintenance of rights in

85

86

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

the course of acquisition (totalization) and administrative assistance) will be included in the agreement.
Specifically, the draft should include the material
(legislation) and personal scope of the agreement,
stipulating whether any types of workers are excluded;
the branches of social security and benefits covered
under the countries’ national social security systems;
eligibility criteria for the benefits; general provisions
(a glossary); and miscellaneous and transitional
provisions (administrative arrangements and dispute
resolution systems). If the experts have indicated
different preferences, additional options reflecting
each country’s preferred wording should be provided.
Rather than having one country prepare the draft for
discussion, each country may prepare its own draft;
this is common where the countries have very different
positions or when one country has special non-standard
provisions for its social security agreements. It is
advisable that the draft(s) be submitted to all of the
negotiating countries well in advance of the negotiations so that their respective experts can analyse the
provisions and make recommendations. Countries may
wish to prepare alternative proposals or counter-proposals for problematic provisions. Guidelines for
drafting a social security agreement can be found in
the two annexes to the Maintenance of Social Security
Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167); Annex I includes
model provisions for the conclusion of bilateral or
multilateral social security instruments and Annex II
contains a model agreement for coordinating bilateral
and multilateral social security instruments.
► Step 3. Negotiations
The purpose of the negotiations is to establish the
text of the social security agreement. The negotiating
countries’ experts, usually their Ministers of Labour,
Health and Foreign Affairs and other government
officials, conduct a detailed review of the preliminary
draft(s), including the title and preamble. For instance,
agreeing on the wording of a clause can be contentious; it may not be immediately accepted by the
negotiating countries or may require further consultation with national authorities. The discussion of differences may be postponed to the next round of negotiations or resolved through a subsequent exchange of
correspondence. Once the countries have agreed on
its wording, the clause and the changes made to the
initial draft of the agreement should be included in
a revised draft that is attached to the minutes of the
negotiations.

Negotiating an agreement may require one round
or several. The outcome of the discussions during
each round should be summarized in minutes, which
should also contain an annex with the revised draft of
the agreement, a list of the participants and any other
relevant material agreed by the parties. It is common
practice for the country hosting the negotiations to
draft the minutes, which are prepared and shared at
the end of each round of negotiations and must be
agreed upon by all of the participating countries. The
scope of the minutes will depend on the practices of
the countries involved and the content of the negotiations. If the meaning or intent of a provision is not
entirely clear, or if a provision was contentious and
subject to significant compromise, it may be useful to
include in the minutes an explanation or clarification
of the provision and its objective. An example of the
need for explanatory notes is the CARICOM Agreement
on Social Security (1997); its unusual or highly technical
legal language (in comparison to the wording of most
other multilateral and bilateral agreements) has made
it difficult to understand its provisions (Hirose, Nikac
and Tamagno 2011). Despite the explanatory notes
provided, Article 18 of the Agreement was ultimately
amended for greater clarity in the Protocol adopted in
2009.
When the negotiations have been completed and the
text agreed upon, the heads of the respective country
delegations initial the text as a sign of their formal
consent. This does not, however, preclude subsequent
changes after further review of the text, provided that
all of the negotiating parties agree to the modifications.
► Step 4. Review of the agreed text
Once the negotiations have ended, the draft agreement
must be reviewed by the relevant authorities of each
negotiating country, usually the Ministry of Justice, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and others as appropriate.
At this stage, the parties review their national laws
and treaty practice, including constitutional issues
as these fall outside the knowledge and competence
of the ministries responsible for social security. This
stage should not serve as an opportunity to reopen the
negotiations. Modification of the agreed text resulting
from the review should be kept to a strict minimum and
should be agreed by all of the negotiating countries.
In the event that there is no agreement, the negotiating parties either: (1) repeat the previous step and
continue the negotiations; (2) temporarily suspend
the process with the intention to resume negotiation

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

at a later date; (3) abandon the process or (4) officially
cancel the process. Non-social-security issues that do
not fall within the mandate of the negotiation team,
such as entry and exit visas and diplomatic channels,
may be addressed outside of the negotiation process.
► Step 5. Signing the agreement
Once the draft text has been reviewed and the
suggested modifications agreed by all of the negotiating countries, the agreement is ready to be signed.
If the countries do not speak the same language, they
will have to agree on the official language(s) of the
agreement and have it translated into their national
language(s) if necessary. With regard to the language
to be used during application of the agreement, it is
common practice for the authorities and institutions
of each of the signatory countries to communicate
with each other and with migrant workers directly
in its official language. Copies of the agreement are
usually provided by the country in which it is signed.
An original copy of the signed agreement should be
retained by each negotiating country and deposited
in the treaty registry of its Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
If an agreement is signed by an official other than
the country’s Head of State, Head of Government or
Minister of Foreign Affairs, the country should provide
an instrument of full powers certifying that the official
is authorized to sign the agreement on the country’s
behalf.
► Step 6. Approval of the agreement
An agreement usually enters into force following
its approval or ratification by each of the countries
concerned. Ratification or approval depends on the
national procedure that each country has established
for the purpose, such as parliamentary vote, approval
by the Council of Ministers or enacting legislation (see
also Chapter 2, section 4).
► Step 7. Conclusion of the administrative
arrangement
The administrative arrangement is fundamental to the
implementation and administration of a social security
agreement and should preferably be concluded before
the agreement enters into force. It complements the
social security agreement by regulating in greater detail
all relevant aspects of administrative assistance with its
application, the legislation to which it applies and the
operational procedures that each country must follow.
It is usually, but not always, incorporated into a different

instrument; for example, the CARICOM Agreement on
Social Security (1997) includes the administrative and
operational provisions in the same instrument. The
difference between the two is that a social security
agreement establishes the legal framework for coordination of the parties’ national social security systems,
modifies their social security legislation and sets out
the principles for administrative assistance between
them whereas an administrative arrangement focuses
on how this administrative assistance will be delivered.
The focus of the administrative arrangement should
never be confused with the substantive provisions
of the agreement, which establish the parties’ rights
and obligations, and should be limited to the relevant
administrative and operational issues. Gaps, omissions
or imprecisions regarding the rights and obligations
established in the agreement cannot be corrected or
amended through the administrative arrangement.
Authorization to conclude an administrative
arrangement should be included in a provision of the
agreement, which should mention the “competent
authorities” that will negotiate it. If these were not
expressly named in the agreement, they should be
specified in the administrative arrangement, which
normally identifies the national institution(s) of
each State party that will serve as its liaison agency
for implementation of the agreement. The relevant
operational and administrative procedures are usually
agreed between the parties’ competent authorities/institutions and liaison agencies during their
implementation discussions. Because administrative
arrangements usually do not require congressional
approval, they are more flexible instruments.
In practice, social benefit applications must be made by
filling out administrative forms, which are often issued in
all official languages of the States parties. The personal
data requested include details such as name, age,
gender, national insurance number, nationality, marital
status, domicile and dates of entry into, stay in and
departure from the country. Depending on the social
benefit, additional information, including the date of
incapacity or medical treatment for invalidity pensions,
relationship to the contributor for death benefits,
employment status and declaration of activities, may
be requested. Medical reports are required for health
benefits and invalidity pensions. Administrative forms
may also provide important information on methods
of payment and on the documentation to be submitted
and include provisions on the use and maintenance of
data and data protection.

87

88

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Step 8. Entry into force
The agreement enters into force when it has
been approved or ratified and the administrative
arrangement has been signed. The date of its entry
into force is usually stated in one of its provisions. It
is common for agreements to enter into force on or
after the date on which the instruments of ratification
or notifications that national requirements have been
met are exchanged. If the countries have not included
such a provision in the agreement, they can agree
on the date through direct discussions between their
foreign ministries or exchange of diplomatic notes.

►3.6 Putting agreements into
practice: Institutional, operational
and administrative considerations
After a social security agreement has been signed,
the relevant institutions must establish the processes,
roles and responsibilities and ICT systems required for
its implementation.
First, they must identify organizational structures at
the international, national and institutional levels in
order to manage the policy, regulatory and procedural
aspects of the agreement and their relationship
with other social security services. In addition, the
implementation of international agreements requires
reliable mechanisms for data exchange between the
parties’ institutions and liaison offices. This includes,
among other things, specifying the data to be
exchanged, the authentication mechanism (electronic
signature or other), the protocol for request-response
exchanges and the implementation of ICT systems to
support these operations. It also involves operational
implementation of the agreement, through automated
processes where possible; this consists primarily of
receiving and sending requests for information and
processing benefit claims.
Nevertheless, putting into practice efficient implementation processes, particularly for the exchange of
data between the States parties’ institutions, can be
challenging. In the absence of standards and reusable
solutions, systems must be developed from scratch and
this process becomes less effective and more costly as
the number of agreements and the requirements for
additional types of data exchange grow. It is therefore
important to: (i) achieve efficient, secure interconnection at the international, national and institutional
levels; (ii) ensure the reliability, security and authentication of exchanges, including the reliability of institutions’ data and users’ identification and the traceability
of operations; (iii) define and agree on data models

and processes; and (iv) establish an organizational
structure with roles and responsibilities.
In order to achieve these objectives and operationalize
the agreement, the following steps must be taken:
► Outline the governance and management aspects
of the agreement by establishing first the mission,
roles and governance structure for its operational
implementation and then a strategy and action
plan.
► Identify the operational processes and information models of the implementing institutions.
Depending on the type of data to be exchanged,
these models may include personal data: birth,
death, marriage, separation, labour records, information on, social security benefits received in the
host or origin country, income declarations and
expenses associated with procedures in individual
cases. The use of standardized information models
improves the efficiency of the agreement’s implementation. It is important to note that while these
models are established at the international level,
operational processes (or subprocesses) may need
to be developed at the national and institutional
levels.
► Develop security and authentication features,
address key issues for authentication of the
agreement, comply with the relevant data
protection regulations and create a secure environment for the interaction between institutions.
► Implement the ICT-based data exchange system,
including by:
► developing an architecture at the international,
national and institutional levels. The goal is to
identify the components that enable effective
and secure interaction between institutions.
This is one of the first and most important
steps in the implementation of an international
agreement (see Figure 3.5);
► developing interoperability techniques in order
to connect the systems of different institutions,
particularly at the international level; this is
one of the essential technologies available to
support the implementation of international
social security agreements;
► setting up a data exchange workflow and an
environment for daily ICT operations. While
the former involves implementing a software
system, the latter requires an appropriate ICT
infrastructure and human resources to perform
the necessary operations and meet the service
quality standards.

ment (footnote 75)
Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

► Figure 3.5 Architecture and types of interaction for a multilateral agreement
LIAISON INSTITUTION

International Interaction
(interoperability)

COUNTRY A
Competent
Institution

National
Interaction

Liaison centre

COUNTRY B
National
Interaction

Competent
Institution

Signatures/certificates
Traceability log
Transaction IDs
Help desk and support

LIAISON INSTITUTION

LIAISON INSTITUTION

COUNTRY C

3.6.1 Governance and management

► the institution’s policies on ICT security, data
protection and the authentication of operations;

Each institution should define the roles and governance
structures required for operational implementation of
the international social security agreements under its
mandate in order to protect the social security rights
of migrant workers, including the institution’s participation in the inter-organizational bodies, committees
and working groups that manage the agreement at
the international and national levels.

► incremental implementation of the agreement in
coordination with the other States parties’ institutions, starting with a subset of functions and
branches and with pilot projects. For example,
implementation of the agreement could begin
with one branch of social security;

Institutions should also establish a strategy and an
action plan in order to implement the operational
activities required under international agreements.
These activities should be aligned with the institution’s
overarching strategic plan. The strategy may include
some of the following elements:
► the institution’s goals for improving the operational
effectiveness of the implementation of agreements. These may include improving programme
integrity, minimizing errors and undue payments
and reducing delays in operations and disputes
with other institutions;

► carrying out parallel training activities for the
staff members to be involved in the agreement’s
ICT-based operations.
Lastly, in order to manage key operations and
resources, the institution should take into consideration:
► the internal authorization procedures and delivery
responses for processing requests from other
institutions. Certain requests must be validated
before they can be processed; for example, benefit
approvals may require special authorization.

89

90

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► the personal identification mechanisms used by
the institution and the country (national identification document, passport number, internal identification issued by the institution and so on).

► inquiring about a beneficiary’s life status (to
prevent undue payments);

► the periodicity of and procedures for notification
of other institutions relevant to the agreement (for
example, automatically when a change occurs or
at specified intervals);

The institution, in coordination with the other institutions involved in implementing the agreement, should
specify the data exchange models for replies to
requests, administrative communications and notifications. This may include information on personal
data, labour records, life and marital status, birth,
benefits received in the host or origin country, income
declarations, expenses associated with procedures in
individual cases and declarations of detached workers.

► the reciprocity rules governing expenses arising
from application of the agreement;
► the institution’s use of digital signatures and
management of the authorizations required for
operations under the agreement;
► the traceability requirements for follow-up
(including keeping a record of operations, particularly between institutions).

3.6.2 Operational processes and
information models
The institution, in coordination with the other institutions involved in implementing the international
agreement, should specify the processes that enable
its application in specific cases.
One of the key processes to be specified is accurate
identification of the persons covered by the agreement
in the various countries in which they have lived,
based on the forms of personal identification which
each country uses for social security procedures and
which may be requested for operations such as benefit
applications and registration of detached workers.
Other common procedures to be specified include:
► collecting the personal data of persons covered by
the agreement;

► claiming a benefit under the agreement;
past

labour

history/records

The data exchanged should have common personal
identification attributes (or unique identifiers) in order
to ensure comparability and monitor events occurring
in a person’s life (such as marriage, death and
disability). One such attribute is the personal identification document or number used in each country for
social security procedures.
The use of standard forms and unique identifiers
for data exchange also reduces the complexity and
cost of implementing international social security
agreements. A generic model agreed by the institutions concerned enables institutions to select the data
to be exchanged in their chosen language and allows
for data transfers through a specified data package
(for example, Extensible Markup Language (XML) or
comma-separated values (CSV) files), thus facilitating
timely implementation of the international agreement.
Two examples of data exchange systems are the
systems used to implement the MERCOSUR Multilateral
Agreement on Social Security and Regulation (EC)
No. 883/2004. Using different ICT architectures, both
systems follow common information models for the
exchange of data between States parties and common
procedures for the benefits and conditions covered.

3.6.3 Security and authentication

► registering a detached worker;

► requesting
pensions);

► granting or rejecting a benefit claim.

(for

► requesting medical records (to assess disabilities);
► inquiring about current employee status (for
detached workers);
► inquiring about entitlements in a host country (for
medical services);

Given the operational processes to be put in place and
the vast amount of sensitive data to be exchanged, the
security of data and the authentication of beneficiaries
are paramount in ensuring that benefits reach the
correct individuals and are therefore a critical feature
of the systems that implement international social
security agreements; this is particularly important in
view of the cross-border, inter-agency nature of these
systems. For this reason, applying security and data
protection policies and regulations should be one of
the first priorities of implementing institutions, a goal
that can be achieved by encrypting communication
channels and the data exchanged.

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

3.6.4 ICT-based data exchange
Another priority is the validation of operational authenticity, including the establishment of an authentication
systems
framework agreed by all participating institutions,
to ensure that transactions are carried out securely,
A data exchange system between two institutions
legally and efficiently. This requires replacing the
for the purpose of implementing a social security
handwritten signatures used in paper-based transacagreement consists largely of the workflow shown
tions74 with electronic signatures based on passwords,
in Figure 3.6. As explained previously, the initial step
biometrics and even digital certificates wherever
is to determine the type of data to be exchanged.
possible and implementing measures to enforce the
Once this has been agreed by both institutions, they
data protection regulations governing transactions
can exchange data requests. The receiving institution
under international agreements and digital certifishould first validate the authenticity of the requester
cates. These measures should be based on the relevant
and then prepare the response by obtaining data from
national regulations and on the conditions established
local databases and information systems. The final
in the agreement. Institutions should follow the
step is totwo
encrypt
and sign the response and send the
Figure 3.6 contained
Typical data
exchange
workﬂow between
institutions
recommendations
in ICT
security standards
information
to
the
requesting institution, which should
an international
security agreement (footnote 78)
such asunder
International
Organizationsocial
for Standardization
decrypt and authenticate the response and enter the
(ISO) 27001) and their staff should use electronic
data into its databases and information systems.
signatures systematically. The ISSA Guidelines on
Information and Communication Technology and related
► Figure 3.6 Typical data exchange workflow
materials75 provide further guidance on these matters.
between two institutions under an
international social security agreement76
► Figure 3.6 Typical data exchange workflow between two institutions under an international
social security agreement76

INSTITUTION 1

1
2

8

Define the model of the data to be exchanged

Send data request

7

INSTITUTION 2

Receive response

Decrypt and authenticate response
- Is the sender authorised

9

3

DATA TRANSMISSION

4
DA
TA
T

Process response
- Enter into local system

RA

Receive request

- Authenticate requester

Process request

- Prepare data response

Local databases and
Information systems
NS

MI

SS

IO

N

5

Encrypt and sign response
6

Send data response

Local databases and
Information systems

74

Many countries still use paper forms to exchange information.

75

See the chapters of the ISSA Guidelines on Information and Communications Technology on the implementation of international social
security agreements and data security and privacy in social security. See also the ISSA Technical Report on Interoperability in social
security.

76

This Figure was produced by ISSA.

91

92

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

With a view to effective and secure handling of the data
exchange workflow, the establishment of an overarching architecture is a key step in the implementation
of an international agreement. This includes:
► the international architecture, which handles interaction between the liaison agencies of different
countries at the international level;
► the national architecture, which handles interaction between the liaison agency and the
competent institutions of a single country at the
national level; and
► the institutional architecture, which handles the
interaction between institutions’ internal ICT
systems and other entities at the national and
international levels.
It should be noted that the characteristics of an
agreement determine the type of architecture required.
While the international architecture of multilateral
agreements requires common services and a trusted
third organization, bilateral agreements may be based
on point-to-point connections77 between the liaison
agencies (for example using web service protocols).
A national architecture is only useful where several
national institutions must coordinate with each other;
it is not necessary where, as is often the case, only one
institution is involved in implementing the agreement:
Connections between the systems of different institutions, particularly at the international level, rely on
interoperability technologies. These technologies,
and particularly web services, are therefore essential
to the implementation of international social security
agreements. Each institution, in coordination with
the others involved in implementing the agreement,
should establish an interoperability framework. The

ISSA Guidelines on Information and Communication
Technology and related materials provide further
guidance on these matters (ISSA 2019 and 2012 and
Ruggia-Frick 2016).

3.6.5 Additional considerations
After a social security agreement has entered into force,
the States parties may wish to modify it. Changes must
be negotiated and agreed by all of the signatories.
New negotiations can lead to:
► modification of certain provisions through a
supplementary agreement amending the original
instrument (for example, the 1990 Supplementary
Agreement amending the Agreement on Social
Security between Canada and the Netherlands);
► replacement of the original agreement by a new
one (for example, the Germany – India Social
Security Agreement of 2017, which replaced the
Agreement of 2008) or conclusion of supplementary instruments, such as protocols or administrative arrangements;
► conclusion of a more comprehensive bilateral or
multilateral agreement. In such cases, where two
or more agreements have overlapping provisions,
those that provide higher levels of protection
prevail. For example, the 2012 ECOWAS General
Convention replaced all social security conventions previously concluded between ECOWAS
countries with the exception of more advantageous bilateral and multilateral agreements which
the States parties wished to maintain (Art. 5). The
Ibero-American Multilateral Convention on Social
Security stipulates that countries must inform
each other if a better condition within a bilateral
agreement is applicable (Art. 8);

► Table 3.3 Criteria for the architecture of international agreements
Bilateral
Only one national
institution
implementing the
agreement

Several national
institutions
implementing the
agreement

77

Multilateral

1.

Point-to-point connections between the
only national institution and the other
liaison agenc(y/ies)

1.

A full international architecture (including
common services and a trusted third
organization) connecting the national
institutions and the liaison agenc(y/ies) of
the other States parties

1.

National architecture connecting
the institutions using point-to-point
mechanisms or integration middleware.
International point-to-point connections
between national liaison agencies and
those of other States parties.

1.

A full international architecture (including
common services and a trusted third
organization) connecting the national liaison
agencies.
A full national architecture connecting the
national institutions.

2.

2.

A point-to-point connection is a secured private and closed connection between two or more locations.

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

► termination of the agreement if negotiations
aimed at modifying it are unsuccessful (for
example, the Australia – UK Agreement on Social
Security of 1990 was terminated in 2001 in accordance with Article 26 thereof).

►3.7 Conclusion
In an increasingly globalized world, it is important
for countries to ensure access to and maintenance
of social protection coverage across borders. This
includes ensuring the portability of social protection
entitlements and benefits acquired or in the course
of acquisition in order to prevent their loss when the
migration experience ends or continues in a successive
country of destination.
The importance of multilateral and bilateral
agreements is recognized in the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly, and Regular Migration and is emphasized
in various ILO Conventions and Recommendations,
including Convention No. 118 and Recommendation
No. 167, and in the ILO Multilateral Framework on
Labour Migration (2006). These agreements eliminate
the legal barriers that hinder migrant workers’ access
to social protection by ensuring the coordination
of social security schemes through the inclusion of
provisions establishing some or all of the key social
security principles (equality of treatment, maintenance of acquired rights and those in the course of
acquisition, payment of benefits abroad and determination of applicable legislation). The choice between
pursuing a bilateral or a multilateral agreement should
be based on the best interests of migrant workers and
their families. Bilateral and multilateral agreements
can also be pursued in parallel; they are not mutually
exclusive and may be complementary.
There are approximately 660 social security
agreements worldwide (ISSA 2021), of which most
are bilateral as they are generally more flexible,

easier and quicker to negotiate. Examples include
the agreements between Canada and Mexico (1996),
France and Tunisia (2003) and Malawi and Zambia
(2003). Multilateral agreements have the advantage
of setting common standards and rules across all of
the States parties thereto, thereby ensuring that all
migrant workers who are nationals of those States
enjoy the same rights and benefits. Examples include
the CARICOM Agreement on Social Security (1997),
the MERCOSUR Multilateral Agreement on Social
Security (2005) and the ECOWAS General Convention
on Social Security (2012).
Negotiating a new social security agreement or renegotiating an existing one generally involves eight steps:
preliminary discussions, preparation of an initial draft,
several rounds of negotiations, final review, signature,
approval, conclusion of an administrative arrangement
and, lastly, the entry into force of the agreement.
The effective implementation of multilateral and
bilateral agreements depends on factors such as
political will, existing schemes and branches covered
in each country, effective collaboration and exchange
of information between the social security institutions
concerned, and their administrative and management
capacities. The operationalization of social security
agreements requires that the countries involved: (1)
outline the governance and management aspects of the
agreement; (2) determine the operational processes
and information models of the implementing institutions; (3) develop security and authentication features;
and (4) establish an ICT-based data exchange system.
It is important to note that while information models
are established at the international level, operational
processes (or subprocesses) may need to be developed
at the national and institutional levels.
The conclusion of social security agreements is the most
protective and most commonly used policy option as it
ensures migrant workers’ access to protection and the
portability of their social protection rights and benefits.

93

94

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Bibliography
CLEISS (Centre des liaisons européennes et internationales de sécurité sociale). 2007. Accords de
sécurité sociale entre la France et la Tunisie. https://www.cleiss.fr/docs/textes/conv_tunisie.html.
Dupper, Ockert. 2014. “Coordination of Social Security Schemes: The Case of SADC”. KollegForschergruppe (KFG) Working Paper Series No. 60. https://www.polsoz.fu-berlin.de/en/v/
transformeurope/publications/working_paper/wp/wp60/WP_60_Dupper.pdf.
EC (European Commission). n.d. “Specialised Information”. http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.
jsp?catId=866andlangId=en.
EMN (European Migration Network). 2014. Main 2013 Study: Migrant Access to Social Security and
Healthcare in France. https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/default/files/what-we-do/
networks/european_migration_network/reports/docs/emn-studies/illegally-resident/09a.
france_national_report_social_security_en_version.pdf.
EY (Ernst and Young LLP). 2016. Social Security Agreement between India and Japan comes into force
with effect from 1 October 2016.
Hirose, Kenichi, Miloš Nikac and Edward Tamagno. 2011. Social Security for Migrant Workers: A Rightsbased Approach. Geneva: ILO.
Holzmann, Robert, Johannes Koettl and Taras Chernetsky. 2005. Portability Regimes of Pension and
Health Care Benefits for International Migrants: An Analysis of Issues and Good Practices. Geneva:
Global Commission on International Migration.
Holzmann, Robert, Michael Fuchs, Secil Elitok and Pamela Dale. 2016. “Assessing Benefit Portability
for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Austria-Turkey Bilateral Social Security
Agreement”. World Bank Discussion Paper No. 1602. Washington, DC: World Bank.
International Labour Organization (ILO). 2010. Coordination of Social Security Systems in the European
Union. An Explanatory Report on EC Regulation No. 883/2004 and its Implementing Regulation No.
987/2009.
–––. 2012a. Information Guide for Migrant Domestic Workers in Lebanon.
–––. 2012b. Social security Coordination for Non-EU Countries in South and Eastern Europe: A Legal
Analysis.
–––. 2016. General Survey Concerning the Migrant Workers Instruments: Report of the Committee
of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations (arts 19, 22 and 35 of the
Constitution). ILC.105/III(1A).
–––. 2017. Addressing Governance Challenges in a Changing Labour Migration Landscape. ILC.106/IV.
–––. 2019. Social Protection for Migrant Workers and their Families in ECOWAS States.
IOM (International Organization for Migration). 2010. Improving Health Care for Indigenous Migrant
Workers and Their Families.
ISSA (International Social Security Association). 2009. International Agreements System – SIACI.
–––. 2012. Interoperability in social security – Report.
–––. 2016a. Handbook on the Extension of Social Security Coverage to Migrant Workers. https://ww1.
issa.int/node/181888.

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

–––. 2016b. Ensuring Access of Migrant Workers to Social Security Benefits through Social Security
Agreements: A case of the National Office of Social Insurance. Republic of Moldova. https://issabox.
issa.int/index.php/s/7pQ8BwKrpXcxJMo.–––.
–––. 2019. ISSA Guidelines on Information and Communication Technology. C.2. ICT-based Implementation
of International Social Security Agreements. https://ww1.issa.int/guidelines/ict/174622
–––. n.d. “International Social Security Agreements”. https://ww1.issa.int/international-agreements.
–––. n.d. “Social Security Facing Increased Mobility of the Global Workforce” https://www.issa.int/
en_GB/topics/migration/introduction.
–––. n.d. “Social Protection for Migrant Workers”. http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/labourmigration/policy-areas/social-protection/lang--en/index.htm.
Japan, Government Pension Service. 2016. Notes on Individual Rules under the Japan-India Social
Security Agreement. https://www.nenkin.go.jp/international/agreement/noteseach/notesindia.
html.
Kulke, Ursula. 2006. Filling the Gap of Social Security for Migrant Workers: ILO’s Strategy. Geneva: ILO.
Mpedi, Letlhokwa George and Mathias Ashu Tako Nyenti. 2017. Towards an Instrument for the
Portability of Social Security Benefits in the Southern African Development Community. Johannesburg:
Sun Media Metro.
Olivier, Marius. 2005. “Acceptance of Social Security in Africa”, paper presented at the International
Social Security Association (ISSA) Regional Conference for Africa, Lusaka. https://ww1.issa.int/
html/pdf/lusaka05/2olivier.pdf.
Ruggia-Frick, Raul. 2016. “Coordinating Social Programmes: Analysis of Scenarios and
Implementation Approaches Based on the ISSA Guidelines on ICT”. International Social Security
Review 69:3–4.
Sabates-Wheeler, Rachel and Johannes Koettl. 2010. “Social Protection for Migrants: The Challenges
of Delivery in the Context of Changing Migration Flows”. International Social Security Review 63:
3–4.
SADC (Southern African Development Community). 2018. Report of the 2018 Meeting of the SADC
Ministers of Employment and Labour and Social Partners, Decision 3: Portability of social security
benefits in the SADC region.
Taha, Nurulsyahirah, Karin Astrid Siegmann and Mahmood Messkoub. 2015. “How Portable is
Social Security for Migrant Workers? A Review of the Literature”. International Social Security
Review 68: 95–118.
UN (United Nations). 2018. Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. https://
refugeesmigrants.un.org/sites/default/files/180713_agreed_outcome_global_compact_for_
migration.pdf.
United States of America, Social Security Administration. n.d. International Programs: U.S. Social
Security Agreements. https://www.ssa.gov/international/agreements_overview.html.

95

96

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Van Panhuys, Clara, Samia Kazi-Aoul and Geneviève Binette. 2017. “Migrant Access to Social
Protection under Bilateral Labour Agreements: A Review of 120 Countries and Nine Bilateral
Arrangements”, Extension of Social Security (ESS) Paper Series No. 57. https://ideas.repec.
org/p/ilo/ilowps/994955792602676.html.
Bilateral social security and labour (migration) agreements
Argentina, Government of. 1996. Acuerdo administrativo para la aplicación del Convenio de
Seguridad Social entre la República de Argentina y la República de Chile. Available at:
http://trabajo.gob.ar/downloads/seguridadSoc/convenios/Chile/acuerdo_administrativo/
AcuerdoAdministrativoChile.pdf [Last accessed 18 January 2019].
Australia, Government of. 2001. Social Security Agreement between Australia and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Terminated 1 March 2001). Available at: https://www.
dss.gov.au/about-the-department/international/international-social-security-agreements/
termination-of-the-social-security-agreement-with-the-united-kingdom-uk-1-march-2001/
social-security-agreement-between-australia-and-the-united-kingdom-of-great-britain-and
[Last Accessed 15 January 2019].
Canada, Government of. 1990. Proclamation declaring the agreement on Social Security between
Canada and the Netherlands in force October 1, 1990. Available at: https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/
eng/regulations/SI-91-115/page-3.html [Last accessed 18 January 2019].
France, Government of.; Mexico, Government of. 2008. Accord entre le gouvernement de la République
française et le gouvernement de la République de Maurice relatif au séjour et à la migration circulaire
de professionnels, 23 Septembre 2008. Available at: https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.
detail?p_lang=andp_isn=83494andp_classification=17 [Last accessed 18 January 2019].
India, Government of. 2017. Agreement on Social Security between India and Germany. Available at:
https://www.mea.gov.in/press-releases.htm?dtl/28098/agreement+on+social+security+between+india+and+germany [Last accessed 18 January 2019]
Sri Lanka, Government of the Democratic Socialist Republic of; Qatar, Government of the State of.
2008. Agreement between the Government of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and the
Government of the State of Qatar concerning the Regulation of Sri Lankan Manpower Employment
in the State of Qatar, 9 January 2008. Available at: http://apskills.ilo.org/apmagnet/countryprofiles/agreementconcerning-the-regulation-of-sri-lankan-manpower-employment-in-thestate-ofqatar [Last accessed 18 January 2019].
ILO International Labour Standards
Maintenance of Social Security Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167). Available at: https://www.
ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R167. Accessed 18
January 2019.
Migration for Employment Recommendation (Revised), 1949 (No. 86). Available at: https://
www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO:12100:P12100_INSTRUMENT_
ID:312424:NO. Accessed 18 January 2019.
International treaties
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969. Available at: https://treaties.un.org/doc/publication/
unts/volume per cent201155/volume-1155-i-18232-english.pdf. Accessed 18 January 2019.

Chapter 3
Accessing social security: Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements

97

98

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

99

Chapter 4
Bilateral labour agreements and migrant
workers’ social protection

100

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Key messages
► Bilateral labour agreements78 (BLAs) can be useful tools for extending the rights of migrant workers, including
social protection rights, provided that they are drafted and implemented in accordance with the international
legal framework for the protection of migrant workers.
► Crises such as the global COVID-19 pandemic may require additional measures to protect these workers’ social
security and other rights. Well-designed BLAs should therefore include provisions that take into account the
impact of the crisis before, during and after migration.
► Social security provisions can be incorporated into temporary labour migration programmes and bilateral
labour agreements in line with international labour standards. A model agreement is available in the Annex to
the Migration for Employment Recommendation, 1949 (No. 86) and UN guidance on bilateral labour migration
arrangements (BLMAs), including a section on social protection, will be published in 2021.
► Equality of treatment between nationals and non-nationals is the guiding principle of all international labour
standards and is applicable to social security. In order to give effect to this principle, BLAs should include
provisions ensuring that migrant workers are treated not less favourably than national workers.
► BLAs should include mention of separate social security agreements (existing or forthcoming) in order to
ensure the portability of social protection entitlements and set out in detail the methods for applying social
security to migrant workers.
► The scope of social protection afforded to migrant workers by BLAs depends on the social security branches
included in the agreement and the specific groups of migrant workers covered (domestic workers, selfemployed, migrant seasonal agricultural workers and so on) and on the related provisions of national
legislation and other agreements to which the State is a party.

78

In this Guide, the terms BLA and BLMA are used interchangeably.

Chapter 4
Bilateral labour agreements and migrant workers’ social protection

►4.1 Introduction
BLAs concluded between countries of origin and
destination in order to regulate migration for
employment can be useful tools for protecting migrant
workers’ rights, including social protection rights,
provided that they reflect the principles enshrined
in international human rights instruments and
international labour standards. Their importance is
emphasized in the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration, which refers to these instruments as a means to “enhance availability and flexibility
of pathways for regular migration” (Objective 5); it also
stresses the importance of integrating social security
entitlements and provisions into labour migration
agreements (Objective 22). More specifically, the
Compact encourages its signatories to:
[d]evelop human rights-based and
gender-responsive bilateral, regional
and multilateral labour mobility agreements with sector-specific standard
terms of employment in cooperation
with relevant stakeholders, drawing on
relevant ILO standards, guidelines and
principles, in compliance with international human rights and labour law
(para. 21(a)).
BLAs have been in use for over a century and the CEACR,
in its 2016 General Survey Concerning the Migrant Workers
Instruments, notes that they are still relevant and are
widely used by States around the world (ILO 2016). In
contrast to unilateral approaches to labour migration,
the conclusion of social security agreements allows for
the formalization of shared responsibilities between
countries of origin and destination and ensures social
security coordination at each stage of the migration
cycle from pre-departure to transit, working and living
abroad, return and reintegration.
This chapter will present the objectives, forms and
scope of BLAs; the guidance provided by the relevant
international labour standards; the remaining
obstacles, protection gaps and challenges to the
adoption of these agreements; and specific countries’
experience with their use in order to extend social
protection coverage to migrant workers.

►4.2 Objectives, form and scope
of BLAs
BLAs can have multiple objectives, including:
► meeting demand for labour in countries of
destination;
► ensuring migrant workers’ access to overseas
labour markets;
► matching the supply of and demand for labour;
► protecting the rights and promoting the welfare of
migrant workers;
► reducing irregular migration;
► strengthening linkages between migration and
development;
► promoting cultural ties.
These agreements can take a number of forms, the
most common of which are the following (Wickramasekara 2015):
► bilateral agreement (BA): a treaty between two
States which creates legally binding rights and
obligations governed by international law. The
agreement establishes in detail the specific
responsibilities of each party and the actions that
they should take in order to achieve the agreement’s goals;
► memorandum of understanding (MoU): a less
formal, usually non-binding instrument which sets
out a broad framework of cooperation in order to
address common concerns (ILO 2017). Countries
of employment tend to prefer this form as they are
easier to negotiate, implement and modify.
In terms of scope, BLAs may apply to all migrant
workers from a State party or to a specific occupation
or category (such as domestic or seasonal workers).
Key issues to cover in these agreements include
gender-responsive measures aimed at ensuring
the exchange of information between States, fair
recruitment, decent working and living conditions
and equality of treatment between migrant workers
and nationals. Model employment contracts can also
be annexed to BLAs in order to provide details on the
rights and obligations of workers and employers.

101

102

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Given the importance of social protection in
employment relationships and the fact that migrant
workers face a number of challenges in accessing
social protection coverage, BLAs should include
provisions designed to prevent migrant workers who
are successively or alternately covered by the schemes
of two or more countries from losing their social
security rights. They also aim to reduce and, whenever
possible, eliminate restrictions on access to coverage
where a worker who had previously been covered by
a country’s social security system leaves that country.
Social protection coverage can be addressed in BLAs
by:
► including specific provisions providing for equality
of treatment of migrant workers and nationals
in respect of social protection. These provisions
should establish the scope of benefits applicable
to migrant workers and determine the applicable
legislation in order to ensure that they are not
required to pay contributions to the social security
systems of two countries for the same work;

► referring to separate existing or forthcoming
bilateral or multilateral social security agreements
in order to ensure the portability of social security
entitlements.

►4.3 The international legal
framework
All three migrant-worker-specific Conventions and
Recommendations and the non-binding ILO Multilateral
Framework on Labour Migration (2006) refer to the use
of BLAs as a means of enhancing international cooperation on labour migration. Their importance has been
emphasized by the CEACR, which has stated that
bilateral agreements and other arrangements can play
an important role in ensuring that migrant workers
are able to benefit from the protections contained in
ILO Conventions, including, by implication, those that
concern social security (ILO 2016, para. 163):

Chapter 4
Bilateral labour agreements and migrant workers’ social protection

► Table 4.1 International legal frameworks that mention the importance of BLAs
International legal framework

Supporting evidence

Migrant-worker-specific ILO Conventions and Recommendations

Migration for Employment
Convention (Revised), 1949 (No.
97)

Article 10
“In cases where the number of migrants going from the territory of one Member
to that of another is sufficiently large, the competent authorities of the territories
concerned shall, whenever necessary or desirable, enter into agreements for the
purpose of regulating matters of common concern arising in connection with the
application of the provisions of this Convention.”

Migration for Employment
Recommendation (Revised), 1949
(No.86)

Paragraph 21(1)
“Members should in appropriate cases supplement the Migration for Employment
Convention (Revised), 1949, and the preceding Paragraphs of the present
Recommendation by bilateral agreements, which should specify the methods of
applying the principles set forth in the Convention and in the Recommendation.”

Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention, 1975
(No.143)

Article 15
“This Convention does not prevent Members from concluding multilateral
or bilateral agreements with a view to resolving problems arising from its
application.”

Migrant Workers
Recommendation, 1975 (No. 151)

Paragraph 34(1c)
“In accordance with national practice –
[…]
(ii) to reimbursement of any social security contributions which have not given
and will not give rise to rights under national laws or regulations or international
arrangements: Provided that where social security contributions do not permit
entitlement to benefits, every effort should be made with a view to the conclusion
of bilateral or multilateral agreements to protect the rights of migrants.”

International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of
their Families, 1990

Preamble
“Recognizing also the progress made by certain States on a regional or bilateral
basis towards the protection of the rights of migrant workers and members of
their families and the importance and usefulness of bilateral and multilateral
agreements in this field […].”

ILO employment Conventions and Recommendations

Employment Policy
(Supplementary Provisions)
Recommendation, 1984 (No. 169)

Paragraph 44
“Members, both countries of employment and countries of origin, should, when
it is necessary, taking fully into account existing international labour Conventions
and Recommendations on migrant workers, conclude bilateral and multilateral
agreements covering issues such as right of entry and stay, the protection of rights
resulting from employment, the promotion of education and training opportunities
for migrant workers, social security, and assistance to workers and members of
their families wishing to return to their country of origin.”

Employment and Decent
Work for Peace and Resilience
Recommendation, 2017 (No. 205)

Paragraph 42
“In preparing for and responding to crisis situations, Members should strengthen
cooperation and take appropriate steps through bilateral or multilateral
arrangements, including through the United Nations system, international financial
institutions and other regional or international mechanisms of coordinated
response. Members should make full use of existing arrangements and established
institutions and mechanisms and strengthen them, as appropriate.”

103

104

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Box 4.1. Articles relating to social security in the ILO Model Agreement on Temporary and
Permanent Migration for Employment, including Migration of Refugees and Displaced Persons
“Article 1. Exchange of Information
1. The competent authority of the territory of immigration shall periodically furnish appropriate information to
the competent authority of the territory of emigration concerning:
[…]
(c) […] social security systems and medical assistance […].
3. The competent authority of the territory of emigration […] shall periodically furnish appropriate information
to the competent authority of the territory of immigration concerning:
[…]
(c) the social security system; […]
Article 4. Validity of Documents
1. The parties shall determine the conditions to be met for purposes of recognition in the territory of
immigration of any document issued by the competent authority of the territory of emigration in respect of
migrants and members of their families […] concerning —
[…]
(e) participation in social security systems.
Article 17. Equality of treatment
[…]

2. Such equality of treatment shall apply, without discrimination in respect of nationality, race, religion or sex, to
immigrants lawfully within the territory of immigration in respect of the following matters:
(a) in so far as such matters are regulated by laws or regulations or are subject to the control of
administrative authorities,
(i) remuneration, including family allowances where these form part of remuneration, hours of work […]
[…]
(b) employment taxes, dues, or contributions payable in respect of the persons employed;
[…]
Article 21. Social Security
1. The two parties shall determine in a separate agreement the methods of applying a system of social security
to migrants and their dependents.
2. Such agreement shall provide that the competent authority of the territory of immigration shall take
measures to ensure to the migrants and their dependents treatment not less favourable than that afforded
by it to its nationals, except where particular residence qualifications apply to nationals.
3. The agreement shall embody appropriate arrangements for the maintenance of migrants’ acquired rights
and rights in course of acquisition framed with due regard to the principles of the Maintenance of Migrants’
Pension Rights Convention, 1935, or of any revision of that Convention.
4. The agreement shall provide that the competent authority of the territory of immigration shall take measures
to grant to temporary migrants and their dependents treatment not less favourable than that afforded by
it to its nationals, subject in the case of compulsory pension schemes to appropriate arrangements being
made for the maintenance of migrants’ acquired rights and rights in course of acquisition.”

Chapter 4
Bilateral labour agreements and migrant workers’ social protection

In addition to encouraging their use, ILO standards
and other international human rights instruments also
provide substantial guidance for developing rightsbased BLAs, including on the protection of social security
rights. The guiding principle of international labour
standards with respect to social security is equality
of treatment between nationals and non-nationals.
This principle arises from the right to equality and
non-discrimination that is enshrined in several human
rights instruments.79 BLAs should therefore ensure
that migrant workers are treated no less favourably
than nationals in respect of social security benefits.
Conditions for accessing benefits, such as residency
requirements, may be imposed in so far as they apply
to nationals, with some exceptions. Furthermore, if
migrant workers leave the country of employment, they
should not automatically lose their right to benefits.80
This is of particular importance to women migrant
workers, who may lose their maternity benefits if they
leave the country or be required to leave the country if
they are pregnant.
► The ILO Model Agreement on Temporary
and Permanent Migration for Employment,
annexed to the ILO Migration for Employment
Recommendation (Revised), 1949 (No. 86), contains
a number of model provisions on the aforementioned social security rights (Box 4.1). In addition to
setting out the key social security principles, these
provisions call for practical measures such as the
conclusion of separate social security agreements
and the regular exchange of information between
States with regard to their respective social security
systems.
BLAs should also include provisions that take into
account the possible onset of crises such as those
arising from conflict, health crises such as the COVID-19
pandemic, and climate-related disasters as these may
require additional measures for the protection of
migrant workers’ social security and other rights. In
these situations, BLAs can serve to clearly establish
responsibility for the provision of healthcare, income
support and other measures to ensure the welfare of
migrant workers during their time abroad and upon
return to their country of origin.

► The Employment and Decent Work for Peace
and Resilience Recommendation, 2017 (No. 205)
encourages States to “strengthen cooperation and
take appropriate steps through bilateral or multilateral arrangements” when preparing for and
responding to crisis situations (para. 42).
Lastly, a number of UN agencies have jointly or individually issued guidance regarding BLAs, including model
provisions on social protection for migrant workers.
► The UN Network on Migration’s thematic Working
Group on Bilateral Labour Migration Agreements is
developing global guidance on these agreements,
including with regard to the inclusion of social
security provisions (forthcoming 2021).

►4.4 Obstacles, protection gaps
and challenges
Although BLAs can be a useful tool for the protection
of migrant workers, in practice they have often fallen
short of expectations in terms of promoting and
protecting the rights of migrant workers; migrant
workers who emigrate on a temporary basis are rarely
granted anything beyond health and accident benefits,
with little or no provision for long-term benefits such
as pensions. An ILO study analysing the text of 144
BLAs and MoUs around the world found that just 30
per cent of them included provisions on social security,
including health benefits (Wickramasekara 2015).
Those that did mainly involved countries in Europe
and the Americas; agreements with Gulf Cooperation
Council countries, where large numbers of migrant
workers are employed, often do not ensure the social
security coverage of migrant workers.
Even BLAs that include provisions on social security
often include a number of limitations on coverage,
including:
► limited material scope, meaning that they do not
apply to all benefits or branches of social security;

79

In its General Comment No. 19 on the right to social security, the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights mentions
the “obligation of States parties to guarantee that the right to social security is enjoyed without discrimination […]. The Covenant thus
prohibits any discrimination, whether in law or in fact, whether direct or indirect, on the grounds of race, colour, sex, age, language,
religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth, physical or mental disability, health status (including HIV/
AIDS), sexual orientation, and civil, political, social or other status, which has the intention or effect of nullifying or impairing the equal
enjoyment or exercise of the right to social security” (para. 29).

80

These rights are embodied in ILO Conventions Nos 118, 97(6)(1)(b) and 143(10); ILO Recommendation No. 151, para. 34(1)(b); and ICRMW,
Art. 27(1).

105

106

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► limited personal scope in so far as they exclude
from coverage certain groups of migrants, such
as domestic, self-employed and seasonal agricultural workers. These exclusions affect women
migrants in particular as they are overrepresented
in domestic work and non-standard forms of
employment;81
► the absence of key social security principles (see
Chapter 2), particularly the portability of benefits
and entitlements.
Given the limitations of social security coverage under
BLAs alone, separate social security agreements are
needed in order to ensure the maintenance of rights in
the course of acquisition, determine methods of benefit
calculation and address other issues with a view to the
full coordination of social security benefits between
the two States parties. In order to gain a complete
picture of migrant workers’ access to social protection,
the provisions of BLAs should be read concomitantly
with those of national legislation, existing bilateral or
multilateral social security and other agreements and
related jurisprudence (van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and
Binette 2018).
Lastly, even where social security rights are clearly set
out in a BLA, a number of practical barriers may limit
their full enjoyment. First, the agreement’s content
and the rights and obligations established therein may
not be made readily available and comprehensible
to migrant workers and other stakeholders, such as
employers and social security administrators. Second,
BLAs often fail to establish concrete mechanisms
for monitoring their implementation and complaint
mechanisms allowing migrant workers to seek justice
if their social security rights have been violated. Third,
the administrative procedures for accessing social
security rights can be particularly difficult to navigate
for migrant workers, who may face language barriers
or difficulties in meeting documentation requirements.

►4.5 From right to reality:
Country practices
While not yet common practice, a number of
countries have concluded BLAs that mention equality
of treatment between migrants and nationals in
respect of social security. For example, Article 7 of the
2005 MOU between Egypt and Italy states: “Migrant
workers enjoy the same rights and the same protection
accorded to workers who are nationals of the receiving
State, including social security, in accordance with the
regulations of the receiving States”.82
Similarly, Article 1 of the MoU on labour mobility
partnership between the Republic of India and the
Kingdom of Denmark (2009) states: “The workers shall
enjoy full rights and privileges accorded to any worker
in Denmark in accordance with the provisions of the
labour and social security laws of that country and as
set out in Article 1.3” (Wickramasekara 2018).
Article 5 of the Migration Agreement between
the Republic of Argentina and Ukraine (1999) also
establishes the principle of equality of treatment and
refers to a separate agreement on social insurance:
Immigrants and members of their families shall
enjoy in the territory of the receiving countries the
same rights and freedoms as citizens of the host
country, including the right to education, paid
work, to travel freely in the host country, to have
social security, legal aid, legal defence and have
the same civil obligations as citizens of the host
country according to the laws of that country. Social
insurance of immigrants and their family members
shall be governed by specific agreements.83
A number of other BLAs refer to separate bilateral
agreements that establish the specific methods for
applying social security to migrant workers in line with
Article 21 of the ILO Model Agreement on Temporary
and Permanent Migration for Employment. Several
BLAs between African and European countries state
that such agreements exist or will be concluded
subsequently; examples include agreements between
Cabo Verde and Portugal (1997), France and Tunisia
(1963) and Spain and Morocco (2001) (Monterisi 2014).

81

The term “non-standard forms of employment” has no official definition. It typically refers to work that falls outside the scope of the
standard employment relationship, understood to mean full-time, indefinite work in a subordinate employment relationship. The
following forms of non-standard employment may be considered: (1) temporary employment; (2) temporary agency work and other
contractual arrangements involving multiple parties; (3) ambiguous employment relationships; and (4) part-time employment (ILO
2015).

82

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Italy and the Government of the Arabic Republic of Egypt on cooperation in the
field of bilateral migratory flows for labour purposes, 2005.

83

Migration Agreement between the Republic of Argentina and Ukraine, signed 29 April 1999.

Chapter 4
Bilateral labour agreements and migrant workers’ social protection

Article 2 of the Cabo Verde–Portugal agreement
stipulates that “[f]or workers hired under this Protocol,
the provisions of the Social Security Convention in
force between Cabo Verde and Portugal apply, with the
exception of the right to retirement pensions”.84

and specific groups of migrant workers covered. BLAs
must be read in conjunction with national legislation,
other agreements and jurisprudence in order to
determine whether migrant workers have full access
to their social protection rights in a given country.

Other BLAs contain in annex model employment
contracts that require employers to provide social
security in accordance with the legislation and regulations of the destination country. In practice, this is often
limited to short-term benefits such as healthcare and
employment injury benefits. For example, the model
contract annexed to the BLA between Bangladesh and
Qatar (2008) stipulates that employers are responsible
for providing free medical treatment to their workers
and for ensuring that workers are paid indemnities for
labour accidents, disability or death in accordance with
Qatar’s labour laws (Wickramasekara 2018).

In light of the foregoing, the following actions are
recommended in order to ensure the fullest enjoyment
of social protection rights by migrant workers:

►4.6 Conclusion
Although ILO standards and other international instruments encourage States to conclude BLAs in order to
regulate and facilitate migration for employment and
ensure migrant workers’ enjoyment of their rights,
in practice these agreements do not always include
provisions on social protection. As this is a key aspect of
employment conditions, it is essential to include such
provisions.
Equality of treatment between nationals and non-nationals is the guiding principle of international labour
standards with respect to social security,85 but the mere
inclusion in a BLA of a provision mandating equality
in access to social security does not ensure the full
enjoyment of migrant workers’ social protection rights;
there may also be limitations in terms of the branches

1. Ensure that the BLAs concluded include provisions
on the social protection of migrant workers, including access to healthcare. Such provisions should,
at a minimum, provide for equality of treatment
between migrant workers and nationals and guarantee their eligibility for social security benefits,
including in response to crisis or emergency situations, under the same conditions.
2. Conclude separate bilateral or multilateral agreements on social security that provide for the portability of migrant workers’ social security entitlements and state how these are to be calculated.
3. Involve the social partners and other stakeholders
in the design, negotiation, implementation and
monitoring of BLAs to ensure that they accurately reflect the realities of the world of work and respond to the protection needs of migrant workers,
making them more effective instruments.
4. Ensure that the content of BLAs is made widely accessible and understandable to migrant workers
and other stakeholders, such as employers, recruitment agencies, labour inspectors and social security administrators.

84

Protocol regarding the Temporary Emigration of Cabo Verde Workers for employment in Portugal, 18 February 1997.

85

See the Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No. 118). In addition, Conventions Nos 97 and 143 mandate equality of
treatment, including with regard to social security. The ILO Model Agreement annexed to Recommendation No. 86 also provides useful
guidance in this respect.

107

108

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Bibliography
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2015. Non-standard Forms of Employment: Report for
Discussion at the Meeting of Experts on Non-Standard Forms of Employment. Geneva, 16–19
February 2015).
–––. 2016. Report of the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations.
ILC. 105/III(1B).
–––. 2017. Addressing Governance Challenges in a Changing Labour Migration Landscape. ILC. 106/IV.
Monterisi, Sara. 2014. Africa: Comparative Analysis of the Mapped Bilateral Agreements Concluded by
African Countries: Draft report. ILO.
Van Panhuys, Clara, Samia Kazi-Aoul and Geneviève Binette. 2017. “Migrant Access to Social
Protection under Bilateral Labour Agreements: A Review of 120 Countries and Nine Bilateral
Arrangements”, Extension of Social Security (ESS) Paper Series No. 57. https://ideas.repec.
org/p/ilo/ilowps/994955792602676.html.
Wickramasekara, Piyasiri. 2015. 2015. Bilateral Agreements and Memoranda of Understanding on
Migration of Low Skilled Workers: A Review. Geneva: ILO.
–––. 2018. Good Practices and Provisions in Multilateral and Bilateral Labour Agreements and Memoranda
of Understanding. ILO.

Chapter 4
Bilateral labour agreements and migrant workers’ social protection

109

110

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

111

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of
origin and employment

112

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Key messages
1.

States may decide to unilaterally extend social protection to migrant workers in order to compensate for a lack
of bilateral or multilateral social security agreements or to ensure more universal and comprehensive social
protection.

2.

Including migrant workers in national social protection responses in line with international human rights and
labour standards plays an important role in mitigating the effects of COVID-19 and supports a swifter recovery.

3.

While countries of transit and destination can unilaterally extend social protection to migrant workers and
their dependents who live or work within their borders, a country of origin may also unilaterally extend such
protection to its nationals and their dependents while working and living abroad or upon their return.

4.

National policies and legislation can ensure equal treatment of migrant and national workers with respect
to social protection based on the principles of equality of treatment and non-discrimination and in line with
international human rights instruments and international labour standards.

5.

No single measure can give migrant workers full access to their social protection rights; a progressive approach
combining several unilateral measures is needed in addition to the conclusion of bilateral and multilateral
social security agreements.

6.

The conclusion of bilateral and multilateral social security agreements between two or more countries remains
the most effective protection measure and is necessary in order to ensure and facilitate the maintenance of
acquired rights and rights in the course of acquisition.

7.

The planning, design, monitoring and implementation of unilateral social protection measures for migrant
workers should be based on social dialogue and States should support their representation in workers’
organizations.

8.

Policy coherence with national migration laws and regional policies with an impact on migrant workers is
important in order to avoid protection gaps and ensure that social protection laws, polices and measures
effectively include all migrant workers.

9.

To address the practical barriers that migrant workers may face in accessing social protection, complementary
measures should be considered. These include, among others, communication and information campaigns,
harmonization and simplification of data collection, shared procedures, facilitation of access to complaint or
conflict resolution mechanisms and enhancement of fiscal space or investment in social protection.

10. While private microinsurance schemes, whether community-based or not, may be considered by migrant
workers who are not eligible for public social protection schemes, these do not relieve the State of its
responsibility to provide all residents and their children with, at a minimum, a set of basic social security
guarantees that secure their protection in accordance with the ILO Social Protection Floors Recommendation,
2012 (No. 202).

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

►5.1 Introduction

Number of social security agreements

Number of social security agreements

variety of unilateral measures. The labour migration
Although the 169 million migrant workers, out of a
landscape, the type of employment (industry, sector
total of 272 million international migrants worldwide
or the informal economy) and the migratory status
(ILO 2021, UNDESA 2019), contribute to the economies
(temporary or seasonal) of migrant workers in a given
of their countries of origin and destination, they are
country are major factors that influence the policies
among the most excluded in terms of social protection;
or measures adopted. In order to ensure that these
all too often, they do not even receive basic coverage
measures are sustainable and socially responsive, it is
under social protection schemes and instruments. Not
important to provide for social dialogue during their
only
do
they
risk
losing
their
social
security
entitlement
Figure 3.1 Change in the number of social security agreements, 1955-2020
planning, design and implementation.
in their home country owing to their absence; they may
also encounter restrictive conditions under the system
Efforts to mitigate the COVID-19 crisis have shown the
of their country of destination.
700
importance of providing social protection, including
600a result, some States have concluded social security
access to healthcare, to migrant workers and their
As
families. Many countries have adopted unilateral
agreements
in
order
to
ensure
the
protection
of
their
500
measures for this purpose (ILO 2020).
workers abroad and ensure the portability of their
400
entitlements;
there has been an exponential increase
In light of the foregoing, this chapter will provide an
in300the number of these agreements worldwide over
overview of the available measures that countries of
the
past
six
decades
(Figure
5.1)
and
there
are
currently
200
employment and origin can take in order to extend
some 660 bilateral and multilateral social security
100
social protection to migrant workers and their families
agreements
(ISSA 2021). However, these agreements
on a unilateral basis. The measures that can be put in
cover
a
limited
number
of
migrant
workers,
since
they
0
1970
1980
2000
2010
2020
place by countries of destination include (i) ensuring
exclude 1960
most workers
in the1990
informal
economy
and
Year of entry into force
equality of treatment; (ii) allowing for flexibility in
those with irregular status, and may be limited with
the design of the scheme and support with regard to
respect to the social security branches, types of migrant
qualifying conditions and minimum requirements; (iii)
workers and level and type of benefits that they cover.
providing lump sum payments or reimbursement of
► Figure 5.1 Change in the number of social
contributions for workers who leave a scheme; and
security agreements, 1955–2020
(iv) considering non-contributory unilateral social
protection measures. Steps that can be taken by
Source: ISSA 2021
countries of origin include (i) allowing migrant workers
to retain membership in a social security scheme or
700
to maintain their rights thereunder; (ii) allowing for
600
flexibility in the design of the scheme and assistance
500
with regard to qualifying conditions and minimum
requirements; and (iii) giving returning migrants and
400
their dependents access to social protection floor
300
benefits.
200
100
0

1960

1970

1980
1990
2000
Year of entry into force

2010

2020

In addition to State-to-State cooperation processes, the
options available to policymakers include the adoption
of unilateral social protection measures by countries
of employment or origin who wish to ensure migrant
workers’ enjoyment of their right to social security.
In an effort to eliminate protection gaps and
facilitate labour migration, States have considered a

This chapter provides concrete country examples,
including a few unilateral measures adopted in
response to the COVID-19 crisis. It also briefly mentions
complementary measures and presents a selection
of non-state measures and initiatives that migrants
may wish to consider in the absence of public social
protection schemes or in order to qualify for higher
benefit levels and enhanced protection. The chapter
concludes with a set of policy recommendations, based
on international human rights and labour standards
that countries may wish to consider when extending
social protection to migrant workers on a unilateral
basis.

113

114

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

►5.2 Unilateral measures
States may decide to extend social protection unilaterally to migrant workers in order to ensure a more
universal and comprehensive social protection
coverage of all workers, compensate for the absence
of bilateral or multilateral social security agreements or
fill gaps in their ratification of ILO Conventions on the
protection of migrant workers’ social security rights.
Before considering the unilateral measures and
schemes adopted first by countries of employment
and then by countries of origin, it is important to
bear in mind that for the purpose of this chapter,
application of the principle of equality of treatment86
in respect of social protection benefits is an overarching framework rather than a unilateral measure. In
other words, the principle of equality of treatment and
non-discrimination on the basis of nationality, which
seeks to ensure that migrant workers are not treated
less favourably than national workers, should apply
to all public measures. However, international labour
standards allow for some exceptions in the case of
social protection measures financed partly or wholly
out of public funds and specific categories of migrant
workers, including those in an irregular situation.87
It should be borne in mind that these unilateral
measures are not mutually exclusive; for example,
countries of origin can both establish a voluntary
insurance scheme with old-age benefits for their
workers abroad and provide certain benefits to family
members who remain in the worker’s home country.
In order to ensure a more coherent and comprehensive approach, such measures can be part of a
national social protection extension strategy. The Social
Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No 202)
calls on member States to formulate and implement

such strategies based on social dialogue, prioritize the
implementation of SPFs as a fundamental element
of their national social security systems and seek to
provide higher levels of protection in line with international labour standards. The purpose of national SPFs,
which may include contributory and non-contributory
schemes or a mix thereof, is to ensure, at a minimum,
basic social protection and access to essential
healthcare for all residents and their children.
While countries of employment can unilaterally
extend social protection to migrant workers and their
dependents who live or work within their borders,
countries of origin can also unilaterally extend
social protection to their nationals and the latter’s
dependents while working and living abroad or upon
their return, as well as to any dependents who remain
in the country of origin.

5.2.1 Countries of employment
Various measures can be taken by countries of
employment, preferably as part of a national strategy
for ensuring more universal and comprehensive
coverage of migrant workers. For the purpose of
this chapter, these measures have been divided into
two categories: contributory social protection (social
insurance) and non-contributory tax-financed social
protection measures (social assistance).88 It should be
borne in mind that these measures may overlap and/
or involve a combination of contributory and non-contributory social protection schemes. For example, the
basic and emergency healthcare available to migrant
workers, including those in an irregular situation, may
be partly State- financed and still require a contribution
from the workers.
The following list provides an overview of options; it is
not intended to be limitative or comprehensive.

86

The principle of equality of treatment is enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No. 118) and other international labour standards
(see Chapter 2).

87

Social Security (Minimum Standards), Convention, 1952 (No. 102), Art. 68 (1).

88

For more details on these terms, see the Glossary.

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

► Box 5.1 Unilateral measures: A non-limitative list of policy options for countries of
destination
With respect to contributory social protection:
1. Ensuring equality of treatment between nationals and non-nationals with respect to social protection,
including by:
► enshrining migrant workers’ right to social security in national constitutions and/or equality-oftreatment provisions in national legislation, and allowing migrant workers to enrol in national social
protection schemes;
► allowing the payment of benefits abroad to non-nationals and nationals who qualify for benefits
offered by the country of employment (exportability);
2. Flexibility in the design of the scheme and assistance with regard to qualifying conditions and minimum
requirements by:
► allowing retroactive payment of missed contributions periods;
► incorporating flexibility or exceptions into the qualifying requirements applicable to certain categories of workers or economic sectors, such as reduction of the minimum number of contributory
years that migrant seasonal workers require in order to qualify for a pension;
► pro rata temporis payment of benefits (proportionate to the time worked);
► exceptions to the obligation to enrol in a social security scheme in the country of employment if a
migrant worker is already covered in the country of origin, thus ensuring that these workers are not
required to pay contributions in both countries;
3. Providing lump sum payments or reimbursement of contributions for workers who leave a scheme.
With respect to non-contributory social protection:
1. Ensuring equality of treatment between nationals and non-nationals with respect to non-contributory
schemes financed from public funds;
2. Facilitating access to healthcare for migrant workers and their families, including those in an irregular
situation;
3. Providing flexibility with regard to residence or other qualifying requirements for specific categories of
migrant workers (such as seasonal workers) or economic sectors.

115

116

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

5.2.1.1 Ensuring equality of treatment
The principle of equality of treatment is a fundamental
human right and is enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and other international human rights instruments.89 It underpins the universally recognized notion
that human beings should enjoy the same rights,
irrespective of their nationality.
With respect to social protection, this principle seeks
to ensure that nationals and non-nationals have the
same rights and obligations, without discrimination on
grounds of, among other things, nationality, race or
sex. Exceptions are possible, for example with regard to
non-contributory benefits and migrants in an irregular
situation.90
Recognizing the social and economic development
benefits of extending social protection to migrant
workers, countries of employment may adopt unilateral
measures based on the equality of treatment principle.
More specifically, these measures may include:
► enshrining migrant workers’ right to social security
in national constitutions and equality-of-treatment
provisions in national legislation and allowing them
to enrol in national social protection schemes;

► allowing the payment of benefits abroad to
non-nationals and nationals who qualify for
benefits offered by the country of employment
(exportability);
► reducing or limiting the qualifying criteria or
minimum conditions for certain benefits (detailed
in section 5.2.1.2).
Including migrant workers in host countries’ national
social protection schemes is essential to the promotion
of equality between workers who do the same job
and creates a level playing field by reducing unfair
competition between migrant workers and nationals.
Excluding migrant workers from contributory social
security schemes may create a perverse incentive to
recruit them as cheap and unprotected labour with the
risk of social dumping and a consequent race to the
bottom.
The aforementioned ILO mapping of 120 countries
(Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017) found that:
► 58 per cent of countries have national laws with
provisions granting equality of treatment between
nationals and non-nationals in respect of contributory social security (Figure 5.2);
► 62 per cent of countries have national laws
with provisions granting equality of treatment
between nationals and non-nationals in respect of
healthcare (Figure 5.3).

89

This principle is also enshrined in various international labour standards; see Table 2.1.

90

Social Security (Minimum Standards), Convention, 1952 (No. 102), Art. 68(1).

Figure 5.2 Number of countries per region with legal provisions on equality of treatment with respect to social security
Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment
(footnote 93)
45
40

►35
Figure 5.2 Number of countries per region with legal provisions on equality of treatment with
16
30
respect to social security91
9

25
20
15
10

5
0

1

45
40

18

22

35
30
25

Africa

17

9

20
15

2

Latin and
North Ameri ca
South America 1
and the
Caribbean

5

3

23

16

5

Arab States

Asia and the
Pacific

Europe and
Central Asia

18
23
22
Number of countries with17
no provisions on equality
of treatment with respect to social security
2
3
5
5
Number of countries with legal provisions on equality of treatment with respect
5 to social security
0
Africa
Latin and
North Ameri ca
Arab States
Asia and the
Europe and
South America
Pacific
Central Asia
and the
Caribbean

10

Number of countries with no provisions on equality of treatment with respect to social security
Number of countries with legal provisions on equality of treatment with respect to social security
Source: Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017.

Source: Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017.

► Figure 5.3 Number of countries per region with legal provisions on equality of treatment in
respect of access to healthcare

Source: Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017.

45
40
35
30

17

25

3

20

10

15 45
10 40
5 35
0 30

25
20
15

18

Africa

18

22

2

Latin and
North Ameri ca
3
South
America
and the
Caribbean

7

1

Arab States

12
Asia and the
Paciﬁc

17
Europe and
Central Asia

10

22
10 Number18
of countries with18
no provisions on equality
of treatment with respect to access to health care
2
1
12
5 Number of countries with legal provisions on equality of treatment
7
with respect to access to health care
0

Africa
Latin and
Source: Van Panhuys,
Kazi-Aoul and Binette
2017

91

South America
and the
Caribbean

North Ameri ca

Arab States

Asia and the
Paciﬁc

Europe and
Central Asia

Note: For the purposes of this study, Africa includes Algeria, Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cabo Verde, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Number ofNamibia,
countries
withSenegal,
no provisions
equality
of treatment
with respect
to access
to health
care
Morocco, Mozambique,
Nigeria,
Tanzania,on
Togo,
South Africa,
Sudan, Tunisia
and Zambia;
North America
includes
the United Number
States andofCanada;
Latin
and
Central
America
and
the
Caribbean
includes
Argentina,
Bolivia,
Brazil,
Chile,
Colombia,
countries with legal provisions on equality of treatment with respect to access to health care
Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru
and Uruguay; the Arab States include Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen; Asia and the
Pacific includes Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Iran, Israel, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, New Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand and
Vietnam; and Europe and Central Asia includes Albania, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Georgia, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Macedonia,
Malta, Moldova, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, the Russian Federation, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

Source: Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017.

Source: Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017.

117

118

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

In the aforementioned CEACR General Survey
Concerning the Migrant Workers Instruments, “a large
number of countries reported that their social security
legislation did not distinguish between nationals and
foreign residents and generally covered everyone who
was lawfully resident or working in the country.92 This
was particularly the case with respect to contributory
benefits, which were granted equally to all employed
workers fulfilling the conditions of entitlement” (ILO
2016, para. 396).93
It is important to note that the existence of legal
provisions on equality of treatment between nationals
and non-nationals does not mean that migrant workers
have the same access to social protection as nationals
who have lived and worked in their country of origin
for their entire life. Access to social protection may be
limited by factors such as: (i) how the term “migrant
worker” is defined at the national level; (ii) the type of
permit held; (iii) the authorization to work; and (iv) the
length of stay. Equality of treatment may be granted
only to certain categories of migrant workers, such as
permanent residents, and may only be made available
to temporary migrants under special provisions and
international agreements (OECD 2018). In addition,
migrant workers often do not fully benefit from
equality-of-treatment provisions in their countries
of employment because they are not eligible until a
specified length of time after their arrival has passed.
In Australia, for example, access to social services
differs for temporary and permanent migrants; the
former, with some exceptions, have no immediate
access to social security benefits while the latter have
access to the full range of social services after 104
weeks of residence (Australia, Department of Social
Services 2019).
► Enshrining migrant workers’ right to social security
in national constitutions and provisions on equality
of treatment in national legislation

In national constitutions, such provisions may vary
from a provision establishing the right to social security
for ‘’everyone” to a statement that foreign nationals
have the same rights as nationals, including in respect
of social security.
► For example, the “constitutions of nearly all
Central and South American countries have
extensive social security provisions” (ILO 2012,
para. 238). Colombia’s Constitution establishes
that all inhabitants have an inalienable right
to social security (art. 48) while Costa Rica’s
states that foreign nationals have the same
rights as nationals. In Asia, the Constitutions of
Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are
other examples of constitutional commitment
to social security (ILO 2012, para. 240).
► Article 27 of South Africa’s Bill of Rights
enshrines the right of “everyone” to have access
to healthcare services, sufficient food and water
and social security, including social assistance.
However, according to the jurisprudence of the
country’s Constitutional Court, only permanent
residents have access to the same social
security benefits as South African nationals
and temporary migrants have limited access to
social protection (Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and
Binette 2017).
In national legislation, this principle may be established
in various forms and in various types of law and may
provide for equality of treatment of migrant workers
in general, or specifically with respect to social security.
► In Spain, the social security legislation (Royal
Legislative Decree No. 1/1994 and Organization
Act No. 4/2000) enshrines the principle of
equality of treatment between nationals and
non-nationals.

Countries may include general provisions on equality of
treatment and non-discrimination in their constitution
and provisions on equality of treatment with respect to
social security in their labour, social security, migration
and healthcare laws or in laws governing specific social
security schemes.

92

The examples given include Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Montenegro, Panama, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, the United States, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).

93

The examples given include Bangladesh, Costa Rica, Germany, Hungary, India, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Poland, Spain,
Turkey and Turkmenistan.

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

► Box 5.2 Migration and social security as two fundamental rights enshrined in the 2008
Constitution of Ecuador
Over the past 15 years, new migration flows have had an impact on the demographic landscape of South
America. This has led to several legal and policy changes that have broadened social protection for nationals
and extended social benefits to migrants. The case of Ecuador is particularly striking as it constitutes one of
the strongest legal frameworks for the protection of migrant workers’ rights in the region.
As part of a comprehensive national policy on human mobility and universal citizenship, Ecuador is the
only country in the region to have elevated the right to migrate to the constitutional level. Articles 40 and
392 of the 2008 Constitution, which apply to both Ecuadorians living abroad and immigrants residing in
the country, expressly recognize and guarantee the right to migrate, stating that no human being shall be
identified or considered illegal because of his/her migratory status. They also recognize the right to asylum
and sanctuary and prohibit arbitrary displacement. Ecuador has ratified the primary international instruments on migration.
The Constitution also enshrines the principle of equality of rights and duties in respect of all foreign nationals
on Ecuadorian territory (art. 9) and prohibits all discrimination on grounds of place of birth or migratory
status (art. 11.2).
Among the rights granted to everyone, including migrants, are the right to work and to social security (arts
33 and 34). The right to social security has a dual constitutional recognition: as one of the prime duties of
the State (art. 3) and as a right that cannot be waived (art. 34). Social security is governed by the principles
of solidarity, universality, equity and efficiency. The Constitution also speaks of “the right to a decent life”, a
concept that includes employment, social security and other necessary social services for all (art. 66).
Since the adoption of its 2008 Constitution, Ecuador’s legal framework on migrant workers’ rights has been
expanded by other legislation upgrading public policies, including the 2017 Organization Act on Human
Mobility, which establishes that migrants have the same right to work and to social protection as Ecuadorians.
They can work in the private sector without special government permission and can even work in the public
sector or be self-employed (IOM 2018). Executive Decree No. 1182 (2012), which regulates asylum procedures
in the country, provides that refugees and asylum seekers shall have access, in accordance with the national
regulations, to all government programmes for economic and social inclusion (Art. 62).

► Authorizing the payment of benefits abroad
(exportability)
National policymakers can also adopt measures to
ensure that migrant workers receive the benefits to
which they are entitled when they leave their countries
of employment. In that regard, it is important to
differentiate between the concepts of portability and
exportability. Countries of destination may authorize
the payment of acquired social protection benefits
abroad (exportability)94 to non-nationals on an equal
basis with nationals. The exportability of benefits
does not require cooperation between countries and
is understood to refer to the maintenance of acquired
rights and payments of benefits abroad, one of the key
social security principles established in Convention No.
157, among others (see Chapter 3). In such cases, the
eligibility criteria and level of benefits are determined

94

by the country of employment and only its legislation
applies.
Under the principle of equality of treatment, non-nationals should have access to the payment of benefits
abroad on an equal footing with nationals. In practice,
however, a certain reticence persists for various
reasons, including the difficulty of verifying eligibility
criteria and processing payments, lack of access to
data protection technologies, negative public perceptions and concerns regarding the financial sustainability of the scheme.
This is of particular importance to women migrant
workers, who may lose their maternity benefits if they
leave the country or be required to leave the country
if they are not actively working, depriving them of
maternity benefits in practice.

There is no internationally agreed definition of “exportability”, nor do ILO Conventions and Recommendations refer to this term explicitly.
Some authors understand the exportability of social security benefits to mean the payment of benefits abroad; see Taha, Siegmann and
Messkoub (2015); Sabates-Wheeler and Koettl (2010); and Hirose, Mikac and Tamagno (2011).

119

120

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Examples:
► In the United States, nationals of a country
in North, Central or South America (except
Paraguay and Suriname) who live outside the
United States and have contributed to social
security benefits in the United States may be
able to receive their monthly retirement or
disability benefits abroad if they are eligible
for them and meet certain requirements. This
also applies to survivors’ benefits paid to the
dependent(s) of such a worker (US 2008; US
n.d.).
► In New Zealand, the public superannuation
benefit is exportable only for nationals of the
Pacific islands; for other foreign nationals,
a social security agreement allowing for the
exportability of benefits is required (SabatesWheeler 2009).
► In Germany, Deutsche Post pays public
pensions to German nationals abroad and to
foreign nationals who have worked in Germany
and contributed to the system through the
German pension scheme, a platform for the
disbursement of funds within Germany and in
200 other countries around the world. It makes
25 million pension payments per month,95
including 1.5 million abroad. The services
provided include the maintenance of inventory
data; payments made at home and abroad;
annual collection of life certificates from
pensioners abroad; and automatic monthly
death data comparison with various countries
(foreign pensions).
Portability, on the other hand, requires cooperation
between the social security institutions of the countries
of origin and employment within the framework of a
social security agreement with a view to joint determination of benefit levels for a particular migrant
worker.96 This is necessary because a country’s social
security legislation may expressly prohibit all payment
of benefits abroad in the absence of a multilateral or
bilateral agreement or may impose more stringent
requirements or require payment of an additional tax
for receipt of those benefits abroad. 97

5.2.1.2 Flexibility in the design of the
scheme and assistance with regard
to qualifying conditions and minimum
requirements
The social protection coverage of migrant workers
depends, to a large extent, on the conditions under
which they migrate and on their country of employment.
Notwithstanding the inclusion of equality-of-treatment
principles in national legislation, migrant workers may
still face legal obstacles when seeking access to their
social protection rights and benefits. For example,
length-of-stay or employment requirements and
types of employment contract or work permit may
prevent them from qualifying for certain benefits.98 It
is therefore important to consider and address their
specific needs and the challenges that they face.
The design of policies, laws and schemes typically
varies from one country to another and may include:
► allowing retroactive payment of missed contributions periods;
► incorporating flexibility or exceptions into the
qualifying requirements applicable to certain categories of workers or economic sectors, such as
reduction of the minimum number of contributory
years that migrant seasonal workers require in
order to qualify for a pension;
► pro rata temporis payment of benefits (proportionate to the time worked);
► exceptions to the obligation to enrol in a social
security scheme in the country of employment if
a migrant worker is already covered in the country
of origin, thus ensuring that these workers are not
required to pay contributions in both countries.
This list is non-exhaustive as each law and scheme must
take into account the specificities and heterogeneity of
the relevant country’s labour migration landscape.

95

These pensions may be classified into several subcategories, including old-age pensions for severely disabled people, old-age pensions
for long-term-insured persons, old-age pensions for particularly-long-term-insured persons, regular retirement pensions, partial / full
disability pensions, widow’s / widower’s pensions and orphan’s pensions.

96

The conclusion of a social security agreement also enables migrant workers and their family members to qualify for benefits from the
countries in which they have worked by adding together, or totalizing, their periods of coverage under the social security systems of all
of the States parties to the agreement in order to meet the minimum qualifying period.

97

For further information and examples, see Chapter 3.

98

For a more in-depth explanation on the legal and practical barriers to the social protection of migrant workers, see Chapter 1.

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

5.2.1.3 Lump-sum payment or
reimbursement of contributions when
leaving a scheme
In its General Comment No. 19: The Right to Social Security,
the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
states that “where non-nationals, including migrant
workers, have contributed to a social security scheme,
they should be able to benefit from that contribution
or retrieve their contributions if they leave the country”
(CESCR 2008, para. 36).
Similarly, the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of their Families states: “Where the
applicable legislation does not allow migrant workers
and members of their families a benefit, the States
concerned shall examine the possibility of reimbursing
interested persons the amount of contributions made
by them with respect to that benefit on the basis of
the treatment granted to nationals who are in similar
circumstances” (ICRMW 1990, Art. 27(2)).
A “lump-sum payment” in the context of social
protection is an amount of money paid on one
occasion when, for example, migrant workers leave
their countries of employment, and thus the scheme.
The calculation of this amount varies by scheme and by
country and often takes into account the contributions
paid by the worker and the employer (UNDESA 2018). A
“reimbursement” is a payment (in instalments or as a
lump sum) of the precise amount of the contributions
that the worker made to the scheme while employed.
It often excludes the employer’s contributions.
International labour standards on social security
authorize lump-sum payments instead of the periodic
payments of benefits where the national system’s
state of development is insufficient; in the case of
employment injury benefits; where the degree of
incapacity of the worker is slight; and in the interests
of the insured person (see, for example, Conventions Nos 17, 102 and 121). With respect to migrant
workers, Convention No. 157 recognizes that where
the payment of benefits abroad is impossible owing
to, for example, the lack of a bilateral social security
agreement, a lump sum may be considered.
Lump sum payments for employment injuries must
be the actuarial equivalent of the benefit owed
(Convention No. 121, Art. 15). The related Recommendation No. 121 provides further guidance and states
that for those with a limited (less than 25 per cent)
loss of capacity, a lump-sum payment is warranted if
the amount is equitable and not less than the periodic
payments that the person would have received over a
three-year period (para. 10).
99

The 2014 Labour Law (art. 72) provides for old-age benefits.

The amount of the lump-sum payment or
reimbursement may also vary according to the
applicable tax and/or interest rates and administration
fees. In the absence of a bilateral or multilateral social
security agreement allowing for the maintenance of
migrant workers’ social security entitlements and
benefits (acquired or in the course of acquisition), some
countries provide for full or partial reimbursement
of contributions or for a lump-sum payment when
migrant workers leave their employment or country of
employment and are not eligible for the full benefit.
In some countries, these are known as “end-of-service
benefits”.
Examples:
► An ILO study found that countries with
retirement provident funds schemes, such as
Brunei, Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore,
allow migrant workers to withdraw their
accumulated pension contributions in the form
of a lump sum when they leave the country
(Olivier 2018).
► In Thailand, recently-unemployed migrants
may only remain in the country for seven days
and thus do not meet the eligibility criteria for
unemployment benefits. At the end of their
contract, their contributions are refunded
through a single lump-sum payment (Olivier
2018; Hall 2012).
► In the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
migrant workers may only work in the country
for five years and are therefore unable to meet
the minimum pension requirement of 15 years
of contributions. Instead, they are entitled to
a lump sum payment upon departure (Olivier
2018).99
► In Japan, migrant workers who have lived in
the country for a short period of time and
contributed to the National Pension System
or the Employees’ Pension Insurance system
for at least 6 months can apply for a “lumpsum withdrawal payment” within two years of
their departure. The National Pension System
provides a “basic pension” covering old age,
disability, and death (Japan 2020).
However, lump-sum payments provide limited income
security as compared to periodic payments (such as
pension benefits for the remainder of a person’s life
or employment injury benefits for the duration of the
injury).

121

122

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

These lump-sum payments are usually taxed.
Depending on the tax (and exchange) rate,100 this may
place migrant workers at an additional disadvantage
as compared to national workers.101 In Australia, for
example, the superannuation contributions that

temporary migrant workers can claim upon leaving
the country are taxed at a rate of 35–65 per cent (OECD
2018). In addition, many social security funds and
schemes do not allow for the payment of a lump sum
(ILO 2018).

► Box 5.3 Ghana
Ghana has developed a social protection strategy (2013) and a national social protection policy (2014) with a
view to the establishment of a national social protection floor, including universal access to healthcare and
basic income security for older persons and children, as well as for the active and vulnerable populations.
The policy also extends social insurance and assistance to all categories of workers.
The national social insurance scheme covers public and private sector, self-employed, informal and migrant
workers based on the principle of equality of treatment. It has three tiers: a Mandatory Basic National Social
Security Scheme (Tier 1) which covers salaried and, on a voluntary basis, self-employed workers and includes
old-age and invalidity pensions, employment injury benefits and survivors’ pensions; a Mandatory Occupational Pension Scheme (Tier 2), which covers salaried workers and provides old-age pensions as a lump-sum
benefit; and a Voluntary Provident Fund and Personal Pension Scheme (Tier 3) for informal economy
workers who are excluded from the mandatory pension scheme and self-employed and salaried workers in
the formal sector.
In Ghana, migrant workers can decide to choose either a lump-sum payment or monthly payments for the
remainder of their life (OHCHR 2014).
According to the Social Security National Insurance Trust of Ghana (SSNIT), as at June 2019, 94,954 migrant
workers were registered under the social security scheme, 3,411 migrants were receiving a pension as
residents of Ghana and 417 non-resident migrant retirees who had contributed to the scheme in Ghana
were receiving benefits abroad. (ILO Forthcoming).
In addition, all residents, including migrant workers, have access to the National Health Insurance Scheme
(NHIS) for the duration of their employment and retirement upon payment of a contribution of 2.5 per cent
of their wage. With the NHIS card, they have access to healthcare without advance payment.
► Box 5.4 Viet Nam
In 2016, there were an estimated 83,046 migrant workers –about 0.15 per cent of the labour force – in Viet
Nam (Viet Nam 2018). The Government embarked on a reform of the existing social security system that
will extend certain benefits to migrant workers; as from January 2022, they will be required to participate in
the national social insurance scheme 102 and will thus have access to old-age, disability, survivors’, sickness,
employment injury and maternity benefits. The scheme covers public- and private-sector employees;
voluntary coverage is also available for self-employed workers (Viet Nam 2018). Previously, these were
available only to Vietnamese citizens.
The new old-age and survivors’ lump-sum benefits will be paid to migrant workers if “they do not meet
the contribution requirements for an old-age pension at the normal retirement age, qualify for a foreign
pension, are diagnosed with a terminal illness, permanently leave Vietnam, or lose their legal work authorization” (Viet Nam 2018).
To qualify for the old-age pension, 20 years of contributions are required. Workers who have not met this
requirement can opt for a lump-sum payment, which is also payable to the survivors of migrant workers
living outside of Viet Nam (exportability of the benefit).
100

Currencies suffering from convertibility issues or severe devaluation can pose a serious obstacle to the export of cash benefits.

101

Although nationals may also be required to pay taxes, these may be lower than those imposed on migrant workers.

102

Decree No. 143/2018/ND-CP.

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

5.2.1.4 Non-contributory unilateral social
protection measures
Convention No. 102103 stipulates that States may limit
migrant workers’ access to non-contributory tax-financed social protection benefits if they are financed
in whole or in part from public funds. Such restrictions
are widespread throughout the world and migrant
workers are often effectively excluded, particularly
where benefits are based on long residency periods.
However, according to Recommendation No. 202,104
under the universality principle all workers, including
migrant workers, should have access to at least a
minimum level of social protection and access to
essential healthcare.
► Ensuring equality of treatment between nationals
and non-nationals with respect to non-contributory schemes financed from public funds
Access to tax-financed, non-contributory social
protection schemes is often need-based and/or
contingent on a minimum residence period. While the
principle of equality of treatment between national
and non-nationals is contrary to limitation of access on
the basis of nationality, countries are entitled to limit
access based on residency or other conditions (such as
resources).
Examples:
► In France, both nationals and non-nationals
have access to the non-contributory healthcare
scheme (Protection Universelle Maladie
(PUMA)). However, in order to be eligible a
person, regardless of nationality, must have –
among other requirements – resided in France
for a minimum of three consecutive months
(France 2019).
► In Canada, all residents, including most migrant
workers with the exception of migrant seasonal
agricultural workers, have access to the taxfinanced universal pension, healthcare benefits
and the earnings-based pension.

► A number of countries (including Canada,
Estonia, Germany and the United Kingdom) give
refugees and asylum seekers access to limited
social protection benefits and services (ILO
2019). In the United Kingdom, asylum seekers
are, however, eligible only for temporary
housing and financial support (ILO 2019).
► Flexibility with respect to residence or other qualifying requirements for specific categories of
migrant workers or economic sectors (such as
seasonal migrant workers)
In order for migrant workers to have access to social
protection on an equal basis with nationals, it may
be necessary, to adapt the qualifying conditions to
their specific situation. For example, non-contributory
benefits often have residence requirements and a
degree of flexibility can ensure that all migrant workers
have access to a minimum level of social protection as
called for in the Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202).
Example:
► In the United States, certain categories of
foreign nationals (humanitarian immigrants,
refugees and survivors of human trafficking)
do not need to wait five years to access certain
public benefits (ILO 2019).
► Facilitating access to healthcare for migrant
workers, including those in an irregular situation
Migrants’ right to health is firmly grounded in international human rights instruments,105 which require
States parties to guarantee, at a minimum, access
to emergency healthcare. However, the extent of
coverage varies widely between countries depending
upon the types of services provided (from emergency
care to a full range of services) and the funding
arrangements (full coverage under the national health
system, voluntary insurance coverage or emergency
assistance). According to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), in more than 60
per cent of the developed countries sampled, migrants

103

Article 68 of Convention No. 102 specifies that: “1. Non-national residents shall have the same rights as national residents: Provided that
special rules concerning non-nationals and nationals born outside the territory of the Member may be prescribed in respect of benefits or
portions of benefits which are payable wholly or mainly out of public funds and in respect of transitional schemes. 2. Under contributory
social security schemes which protect employees, the persons protected who are nationals of another Member which has accepted the
obligations of the relevant Part of the Convention shall have, under that Part, the same rights as nationals of the Member concerned:
Provided that the application of this paragraph may be made subject to the existence of a bilateral or multilateral agreement providing
for reciprocity”.

104

Article 3 of the Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202), states: ‘’Recognizing the overall and primary responsibility of
the State in giving effect to this Recommendation, Members should apply the following principles: (a) universality of protection, based on
social solidarity […]’’.

105

The 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Art. 25), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Art. 12)
and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Art. 28).

123

124

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

with irregular status had no access to preventive care
and in about 35 per cent of those countries they had
no access to emergency care; in developing countries
those figures are 70 and 30 per cent, respectively
(UNDP 2009). Thus, entitlement to healthcare under
national legal systems is often at odds with the rights
of migrants with irregular status as established in
international human rights instruments.
In addition to being legally excluded, migrants in an
irregular situation may face other barriers to effective
access to healthcare; it may not be affordable or they
may not seek treatment for fear of deportation (see
Chapter 6.3). Countries should therefore consider the
financial capacities of migrant workers, including those
in an irregular situation (ILO 2020b), who should, at a
minimum, have access to essential healthcare as part
of national SPFs in line with Recommendation No.
202 and with the relevant international human rights
instruments.106
In its 2019 General Survey on the Social Protection Floors
Recommendation, the CEACR states that 35 governments had reported that emergency medical care was
available for persons other than residents, irrespective
of their immigration status.
Examples:
► In the Czech Republic, “extraordinary immediate
assistance” is provided to non-residents in the
event of a health-related emergency.
► In Denmark and New Zealand, migrants with
irregular status have access to urgent, statefinanced medical care.
► In Finland, municipalities may decide to grant
extensive health services to migrants in an
irregular situation (ILO 2019, para. 140).
In 2011, migrants in an irregular situation had access
to emergency healthcare in only 19 of the 27 EU
countries, to emergency and primary healthcare
in only one country (the United Kingdom) and to
“emergency, primary and secondary healthcare and
specialist and in-patient treatment” in only 6 countries
(Belgium, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal and
Spain) (UNDESA 2018). Not all of these systems are fully
tax-financed and in most cases migrants, including
those in an irregular situation, must pay. In 8 of the
aforementioned 19 countries, migrants do not have
to pay for emergency care (UNDESA 2018). In some
countries where healthcare is not free of charge (such

as Belgium, Hungary and the Netherlands), the State
may reimburse healthcare providers under certain
circumstances (Spencer and Hughes 2015). Even in
countries where migrants with irregular status have
access to primary and secondary care, they must
provide documentation (an ID and proof of residence)
in order to meet the qualifying conditions. A study by
the European Observatory on Access to Healthcare
revealed that in 11 countries (Belgium, France,
Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom),
the majority of the migrants in an irregular situation
surveyed said that the healthcare that they had
received was not adequate and 14 per cent reported
that they had been denied healthcare, including while
pregnant (FRA 2011).
Under Switzerland’s mandatory health insurance
system, migrants in an irregular situation are entitled
to register with the basic health insurance scheme
at the same subsidized rate as nationals in a modest
economic situation. The benefits of this scheme
include outpatient and inpatient medical treatment,
prescribed medications, maternity care and treatment
in the event of an accident. Article 12 of the Federal
Constitution enshrines the right to basic healthcare,
irrespective of nationality, residence or insurance
status. In practice, however, services vary from one
municipality to another as there is some flexibility as to
the definition of “basic healthcare” (Switzerland, 2020;
ILO Forthcoming).
In August 2013, the Government of Thailand set up a
low-cost health insurance scheme that is available to
all migrants, irrespective of migration status. In 2015, a
total of 1.3 million migrants were enrolled, each paying
an annual contribution of 2,200 Baht (equivalent
to approximately US$ 73). A supplementary special
insurance policy costing 365 baht per year (US$ 10) is
available for migrant children up to the age of seven.
This package, which includes immunization services
and antiretroviral drugs, is identical to the one received
by Thai citizens under the Universal Health Coverage
Scheme. However, the contribution levels do not cover
the real annual cost; hospital expenses are, on average,
higher than the capitation107 received for coverage
of migrants. In addition, the fact that hospitals’
reimbursement under the Universal Health Coverage
Scheme takes three to four months can place them in
difficulty (Tangcharoensathien, Thwin and Patcharanarumol 2016; ILO, forthcoming).

106

In a number of countries, including Argentina, the Republic of Korea, Thailand and 20 EU Member States, migrant workers with irregular
status have access to, at a minimum, basic or emergency healthcare.

107

Capitation is a payment arrangement for healthcare service providers whereby they receive a set amount for each enrolled person
assigned to them over a given period of time, whether or not that person seeks care.

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

In 2004, Argentina adopted a Migration Act (Act
No. 25,871/04) reaffirming that migrant workers,
including migrants with irregular status, are entitled
to healthcare (ILO 2014; Cavaleri 2012; OHCHR 2014).
Trinidad and Tobago has also established universal
access to healthcare for all migrants in its territory,
regardless of status (OHCHR 2014). In the Republic of
Korea, migrants in an irregular situation can receive
emergency care in hospitals. In principle, this care is
free of charge but as the reimbursement process is
lengthy, hospitals often ask migrants to pay at the time
of service (OHCHR 2014).
Guaranteeing access to emergency and other
healthcare for all migrants, including those in an
irregular situation and their families, has numerous
advantages not only for them, but also for the country
of destination; it improves their health status, reduces
their vulnerability and social exclusion, enhances their
resilience, employability and productivity and is the first
step towards regularization. It also benefits society as
a whole by reducing both public health risks (including
the transmission of communicable and respiratory
diseases such as COVID-19) and the infant and child
mortality rates (ILO 2020a).

5.2.2 Countries of origin
Access to social protection in countries of origin may
be legally restricted under the principle of territoriality,
which limits the application of social security legislation
to the national territory. In such cases, nationals
working abroad are not covered by the relevant
legislation and are therefore not entitled to benefits.
Countries can, however, provide some level of protection
to their nationals working abroad. This is particularly
important where the country of employment is neither
in a position to provide social protection benefits nor
willing to negotiate a new social security agreement or
to address gaps in an existing one (for example, where
the agreement only covers pensions).

5.2.2.1 Allowing nationals working abroad
to join or retain membership in the social
security system of their country of origin or
to maintain the rights acquired there
In order to extend social protection to their nationals
working abroad, some countries allow their migrant
workers to retain membership in their national
insurance schemes. Countries of origin may wish to:

► Box 5.5 Unilateral measures – a non-limitative list of policy options for countries of origin
1.

States can allow their nationals working abroad, together with their dependents, to acquire or retain
membership or maintain rights acquired in their country of origin. Thus, countries of origin may wish to:
► allow their nationals working abroad to join or retain membership in an existing general social
protection scheme on a voluntary basis;
► establish a voluntary or mandatory specific scheme for certain groups of workers (self-employed
migrant workers) or for migrant workers alone;
► establish a specific mechanism, such as a welfare fund, to provide certain social protection benefits
and facilitate registration, and thus access to existing general or specific schemes;
► ensure the payment of benefits abroad (exportability) to nationals and their dependents.

2.

States can be flexible in the design of the social security schemes to allow migrants to meet the qualifying
conditions and minimum requirements by:
► allowing migrants to make retroactive payments for missed contribution periods;
► exempting migrants from the qualifying conditions and minimum requirements for social security;
► authorizing lump-sum payments or reimbursement of contributions for nationals who move abroad
and leave the scheme;
► providing subsidies for certain categories of workers (such as returning migrants) to compensate for
missed contribution periods.

3.

States can give nationals who have returned to their country of origin access to their national social protection
floor benefits.

125

126

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► allow their nationals working abroad to join or
retain membership in an existing general social
protection scheme on a voluntary basis;
► establish a voluntary or mandatory specific
scheme for certain groups of workers (selfemployed, independent or migrant workers) or
for migrant workers alone;
► establish a specific mechanism, such as a
welfare fund, to provide certain social protection
benefits and facilitate registration, and thus
access to existing general or specific schemes;
► ensure the payment of benefits abroad
(exportability)
to
nationals
and
their
dependents.
► Giving nationals working abroad access to a
general social protection scheme
Migrant workers may wish to retain membership in the
social protection schemes of their countries of origin
for various reasons (ISSA 2014):
► Availability of schemes (for specific branches)
may be limited in the country of employment.
► The conditions and benefit levels of the country
of origin’s scheme may be more advantageous;
in such cases, migrants may wish to
complement the insurance available in the
employment country with additional insurance
in their country of origin that provides higher
benefit levels.
► Migrants, and particularly temporary, seasonal
or circular migrant workers and workers who
frequently move from one country to another,
may wish to benefit from continuity of service.
► Migrants may wish to ensure that their
dependents living in the country of origin
remain covered there.
► Migrants who frequently move from one
country to another may wish to minimize
administrative procedures.
Examples:
► In Myanmar, nationals working abroad may
contribute voluntarily to the funds covered
by the 2012 Social Security Law (ILO 2018; ILO
2015).

► In 2014, the Government of Colombia issued
a decree on social protection mechanisms
for nationals working abroad, which allows
them to enrol voluntarily in the General
Pension System as independent workers
with a contribution of 2 per cent of their
monthly wage. It also gives members of
their families who remain in the country of
origin access to some social benefits. The
relevant administrative procedures must be
performed through the compensation fund
(Caja de Compensación) of the family’s place
of residence.
► Nationals of the United Kingdom who
are working abroad and have previously
contributed to the social security system in
the UK can retain membership in the national
pension system on a voluntary basis and under
certain conditions, regardless of whether they
are members of such a scheme in the country
of employment (ISSA 2014).
► In Mozambique, the 2004 Law on Social
Protection allows nationals working abroad
who are not covered by the mandatory
social security system of their countries
of employment to enrol in Mozambique’s
mandatory social security scheme on a
voluntary basis. However, the more limited
scheme for self-employed persons applies to
them.
► In Ukraine, nationals working abroad have
access to the state pension system on a
voluntary basis (IOPS 2009).
► The Philippines provides social security
coverage to overseas Filipino workers through
voluntary insurance under the Social Security
System (SSS), the supplementary pension
savings (SSS Flexi-Fund) and the Overseas
Workers Programme (OWP) of the Philippine
Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth).
The SSS provides social security insurance with
disability, sickness, maternity, retirement and
death (including funeral expenses) benefits.
► Jordanian nationals employed abroad who do
not have mandatory coverage in the country of
employment, as well as non-working nationals
(including housewives and students) who live
abroad, are entitled to voluntary coverage
(old-age, disability and survivors’ benefits)
under Jordan’s social security system (US
2014).

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

► Tunisian workers who are employed abroad
and are not covered in their country of
employment or under a reciprocal social
security agreement may enrol in Tunisia’s
social security scheme on a voluntary basis
(Maddouri 2011).
► In Switzerland, as part of the first pillar, Swiss
and nationals of EU Member States who are
working outside the EU or the European Free
Trade Agreement (EFTA) zone may retain
membership in the voluntary old age and
survivors’ insurance scheme under certain
conditions, including the requirement that
they have been insured for at least five
consecutive years in Switzerland (CCO 2020).
It is of the utmost importance for returning migrant
workers to be able to maintain rights acquired in the
country of origin.
Example:
► As at 2019, Spain has a contributory
unemployment benefit scheme for returning
Spanish nationals who have contributed to
the country’s social security scheme for a
minimum of 360 days during the six years prior
to departure.
► Migrant-specific voluntary and mandatory social
protection schemes
Countries of origin may decide to create a specific
scheme for certain groups of workers (such as
self-employed migrant workers) or for migrant
workers in general. This has certain disadvantages
over the incorporation of these workers into a general
social protection scheme; experience has shown that
the larger the contribution base of a social protection
scheme, the more financially sustainable it will be.
Moreover, it is essential to ensure that the (potential)
beneficiaries have confidence in the proposed scheme,
particularly where enrolment is voluntary. The small
number of nationals working abroad; their types of

contracts, jobs and working conditions; and their
limited contributory capacity pose challenges in terms
of the feasibility, proper functioning and sustainability
of a scheme devoted solely to this group whereas
a social protection scheme based on solidarity and
large risk pooling is both consistent with the relevant
international standards and more financially and
administratively sustainable.
Example:
► The French Social Security Fund for Nationals
Abroad (Caisse des Français de l’Étranger (CFE))
allows French nationals working abroad to
maintain their French social security benefits.
It covers sickness, maternity, disability and
employment injury, provides access to old-age
benefits managed by the National Retirement
Pension Fund (Caisse Nationale d’Assurance
Vieillesse (CNAV)) and ensures the continuity of
entitlements with no waiting period and no lost
contribution quarters with respect to the oldage pension.108 As at 2020, more than 200,000
individuals are covered by the CFE worldwide.
► Establishing overseas welfare funds, which may
include social protection benefits
During the 1970s oil boom, the demand for foreign
labour increased in Middle Eastern countries. Following
reports of abuse and exploitation of migrant workers
and concerned with the lack of social protection of
their nationals abroad, countries of origin explored
options for protecting them. In order to address the
obstacles to social protection that migrant workers
encounter in destination countries (such as legal status
or nationality, insufficient duration of employment and
residence and lack of social security agreements) and
the exclusion of specific categories of workers (such
as domestic workers) from the scope of application of
national laws,109 a number of countries have established
overseas welfare funds. The Philippines did so in 1977
(see below), followed by Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri
Lanka, Nepal and India.

108

For more information, see: https://fr.april-international.com/en/your-cover-abroad/la-caisse-des-francais-de-l-etranger-cfe.

109

For instance, “domestic helpers” are excluded from the personal scope of application of the Saudi Arabia Labour Law (art. 7(2)) and its
Social Insurance Law, which regulates old-age, disability and survivors’ benefits, does not cover “domestic servants” (art. 5(1e)).

127

128

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Overseas welfare funds have received increased
attention110 and are often cited as unique unilateral
measures. However, the social protection benefits that
they provide are often limited in terms of both scope
and level.
Institutional arrangements. Overseas welfare funds
are often supported by a dedicated ministry and/or
specialized statutory body responsible for protecting
the interests of the country’s overseas workers.
Bangladesh, India, Nepal, the Philippines and Sri Lanka
have such arrangements.
Examples:
► The Philippines – The Overseas Workers Welfare
Administration (OWWA), which operates under
the Department of Labour and Employment
(DOLE), has developed responsive programmes
and services for the social protection of
overseas Filipino workers and their dependents.
Its organizational structure includes a Board
of Trustees, a tripartite body of government,
management and overseas workers comprising
land-based, sea-based and women’s sector
representatives. Its secretariat includes many
welfare officers based in regional and field
offices in 27 countries.

by the Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos
Act (1995) (Act No. 8042).
► Pakistan’s Emigration Ordinance, adopted in
1979, provides for establishment of the OFP.
► Sri Lanka’s OWWF was established based on the
Bureau of Foreign Employment (1985) (Act No.
21), subsequently amended in 1994 and 2009.
Financing. Welfare funds are membership institutions and registration requires the payment of a
membership fee (see Figure 5.4), usually by the
migrant worker. They can also be financed from “the
initial capital investments or contributions of foreign
employers, [and] recruitment agencies” (ILO 2015).
► Figure 5.4 Membership fees for registration
with welfare funds
OWWA (Philippines)

OWWF (Sri Lanka)

US$ 25 contribution for 2
years

Contribution of up US$
75, depending on the
prospective salary of the
migrant

Mandatory contribution

Mandatory contribution

Renewal of membership
after two years

Renewal of membership
after two years while
working for the same
employer

► Pakistan – Pakistan’s welfare fund is managed
by the Overseas Pakistanis Foundation (OPF).
► Sri Lanka – The Overseas Workers Welfare Fund
(OWWF) is administered by the Sri Lanka Bureau
of Foreign Employment (SLBFE), which has total
responsibility for overseas employment and the
social protection of migrants and is managed by
a Board of Directors appointed by the Minister
of Foreign Employment Promotion and Welfare.
In 2012, the SLBFE recorded 282,331 departures
for foreign employment, the highest number to
date (SLBFE n.d.).
Legal basis. The creation of welfare funds based on a
law or decree contributes to their sustainability over
time.
Examples:
► The mandate of the Philippines’ OWWA has
its legal basis in Letter of Instruction No. 537
(1977) and subsequent presidential decrees and
executive orders. It was further strengthened

Fee to be paid before
deployment
Source: SLBFE n.d.; OWWA n.d.

Services and benefits. Overseas welfare funds can
provide services and benefits during all stages of the
migration cycle and may include legal counselling,
pre-departure orientation, training, loans, education
grants, burial and repatriation support, repatriation and
reintegration programmes, psycho-social counselling
and consular support in countries of employment.
They may also provide social protection benefits
such as death, disability and survivors’ benefits and
facilitate access to health insurance (such as PhilHealth
in the Philippines) and other existing social protection
schemes (such as the Sesetha Pension scheme in Sri
Lanka). In certain cases, they also provide benefits to
migrants’ dependents who remain in the country of
origin; for example, the overseas welfare funds of Sri
Lanka and the Philippines111 award scholarships to the
children of migrant workers (Del Rosario 2008).

110

Cambodia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and Myanmar, among others, are interested in setting up a welfare fund. For more
information, see: https://www.social-protection.org/gimi/RessourcePDF.action?id=55654.

111

“The Education for Development Scholarship Program provides grants of US$ 1,200 per year to deserving and qualified dependents of
[overseas foreign workers] attending college-degree courses. The Skills-for-Employment Scholarship Program pays for one-year technical
and six-month vocational courses reflecting the technical skills requirements of overseas jobs. The Seafarer’s Upgrading Program targets
seafarers and aims to develop their skills by providing between US$24 to US$150 per course” (Ruiz and Agunias 2008).

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

► Figure 5.5 Services provided by the welfare funds of Sri Lanka and the Philippines
Welfare funds

Services provided to migrant workers

Sri Lanka
The Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign
Employment (SLBFE) and its
Overseas Workers Welfare Fund
(OWWF)

pre-departure services (such as training, loan facility, orientation and registration);
welfare assistance from the OWWF: Scholarships for children
compensation to the family in the event of death;
compensation for partial and total disability;
repatriation.

The Philippines
The Overseas Workers Welfare
Administration (OWWA)

“social benefits” (disability benefit for injuries sustained owing to an accident while
working abroad, death benefits and burial benefits);
education and training benefits;
welfare assistance programmes (psycho-social counselling, conciliation, airport
assistance, legal assistance);
repatriation and reintegration programmes.

Challenges and limitations. While welfare funds
aim to provide protection to migrant workers, this
protection is often insufficient and may not take into
consideration the needs and characteristics of migrant
workers throughout the migration process (IOM 2015;
MPI 2007; Olivier 2018; OSCE 2006; Del Rosario 2008;
Ruiz and Agunias 2007).
Examples:
► The fee paid by beneficiaries of the scheme
is often uniform, regardless of the variety of
risk profiles across destinations, occupations,
sectors, skill levels, contributory capacity,
residence, or employment duration.
► In many cases, benefits can only be enjoyed by
migrants upon their return to their country of
origin.
► Benefits must often be claimed within a limited
number of months after return to the country
of origin.
► Some funds do not contain provisions for
dependent family members who remain in the
country of origin.
► Beneficiaries are often not involved in the
design, coordination and monitoring of the
welfare fund.
► There is often a lack of information and
communication on the available services and
benefits and how to access them (IOM 2015).
► Processing times
cumbersome.

may

be

lengthy

and

► Conditions for repatriation support may be
restrictive; for example, pregnancy alone may
not be sufficient unless there is violence or
harassment involved (SLBFE n.d.).
► Migrant workers who change employment or

extend their contract may lose coverage or be
charged a renewal fee.
► There are no in-depth impact evaluation studies
of welfare funds.
► Payment of benefits abroad for nationals and their
dependents
Countries of origin may authorize the payment of
benefits in the country of employment to their nationals
who work abroad. While national legislation often
makes such payment conditional on the existence of
a bilateral or multilateral social security agreement,
this is unnecessary. Countries may unilaterally decide
to permit the payment of benefits abroad (see section
5.2.1.1).
Examples:
► Old-age pension benefits administered by
Jordan’s Social Security Corporation can be paid
to Jordanian nationals abroad (US 2016).
► Nationals of the United States may receive their
social security payments abroad, so long as they
are eligible for them (US 2008; US n.d.).

5.2.2.2 Flexibility in the design of the
scheme and assistance with qualifying
conditions and minimum requirements
Countries of origin that allow their migrant workers
to join or retain membership in a contributory or
non-contributory social protection scheme in their
home country should also ensure that these workers
can meet the qualifying conditions. Their migration
experience, type and length of contract, residence
in the country of employment, length of stay and
contribution period before departure or upon return
may affect their access to or level of social protection
benefits.

129

130

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

The following measures might be considered with
a view to allowing migrant workers to meet such
qualifying conditions, thus ensuring their access to
social protection:
► Allowing migrants to make retroactive payment
for missed contribution periods. For example,
workers who receive a lump-sum payment of their
accrued social security contributions upon leaving
their country of employment can use it to make
retroactive voluntary contributions for the missing
periods, also known as “buy back”. This option is
also useful for workers who move from a country
with a provident fund system to one with a social
insurance system (ILO 2018, p.119). In countries
where the laws do not permit voluntary contributions, an exception to these provisions would
prevent migrant workers from losing the total
amount of their accrued benefits (Olivier 2018).
This is particularly important in the absence of
social security agreements.
► Exemptions from qualifying conditions and
minimum requirements for migrants. Reduction
of the minimum number of contributory or residence years needed in order to qualify for certain
benefits is common practice for certain categories
of workers (such as those employed in sectors
with challenging working conditions in terms of
safety and health). These exceptions could also be
considered for migrant workers, who may have
worked and contributed for their entire working
life without being able to benefit from a pension
owing to the absence of social security agreements
allowing them to totalize their contributory years.
An exception to the minimum number of contributory years required would thus take into account
the specific challenges that migrant workers face
in their efforts to meet the qualifying conditions.
► Lump-sum payments or reimbursement of contributions for nationals who move abroad and
leave the scheme. This is particularly important
for migrant workers who permanently leave the
country of origin and establish themselves elsewhere or who move from a country with a provident fund to a country with a social insurance
scheme or vice versa.
► Provision of subsidies for certain categories
of workers (such as returning migrants) to
compensate for missed contributions periods.
Migrant workers may find it financially challenging
to pay retroactively for missed contribution
periods, even where this is allowed. It is important

for countries of origin to ensure that all migrant
workers have access to at least a minimum level
of income security by allowing them to access
non-contributory social protection benefits or
subsidizing contributions to contributory schemes
in line with the ILO Social Protection Floors
Recommendation, 2012 (No 202).

5.2.2.3 Allowing nationals who return to
their country of origin to access national
social protection floor benefits.
The ILO Social Protection Floors Recommendation,
2012 (No. 202) provides member States with guidance
in the formulation and implementation of national
social security extension strategies, based on social
dialogue, which prioritize the establishment of SPFs
as a fundamental element of their national social
security systems and extend social protection to
the unprotected, the poor and the most vulnerable,
including migrants and their families.
To that end, countries of origin should consider
establishing or strengthening their SPFs, which should
include, at least, the following guarantees:
► access to essential healthcare, including maternity
care;
► basic income security for children and access to
nutrition, education, care and any other necessary
goods and services;
► basic income security for persons of active age
who are unable to earn sufficient income, particularly in the event of sickness, unemployment,
maternity and disability; and
► basic income security for older persons.
The aforementioned social security guarantees should
be provided to at least all residents and children as
defined in national laws and regulations, subject to
states’ existing international obligations (ILO 2012,
para.6). In accordance with Recommendation No.
202, these guarantees should, at least, be provided to
migrant workers with residence status and to children,
irrespective of their status and that of their parents or
guardians. The reference to “all” residents (para. 6)
emphasizes that all types and categories of residents
and residence status defined under national law,
whether permanent or temporary, should be included
(ILO 2019, para. 130).

Figure 5.6 Social protection ﬂoors for migrant workers throughout their life
Chapter 5
cycle
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment
► Figure 5.6 Social protection floors for migrant workers throughout their life cycle

Access to health care,
including maternity
care, for migrant
workers and their
families, including
those left behind

Economic security
and access to
nutrition, education
and care for migrant
children

E.g. maternity,
disability, etc.
Linkages with
employment and
labour market
policies

Social
(non-contributory)
pensions, e.g. for
returning migrants

SOCIAL PROTECTION FLOORS for migrant workers, refugees and their families
Access to goods
and services for
essential health
care including
maternity care

Basic income
security for children
(access to nutrition,
education, care and
any other necessary
goods and services)

By implementing national SPFs,112 countries of origin
can provide the necessary guarantees to ensure that
migrant workers and their families, including returning
migrants and dependents living in a different country
from the migrant breadwinner, have, at a minimum,
access to essential healthcare and basic income
security throughout their life cycle (see Figure 5.6).
This may help to reduce the need for migrant workers
to rely on private social protection initiatives in order
to support their families and communities back home
(see section 5.4).
In Mexico, there are two types of public healthcare
scheme. The Mexican Social Security Institute
(Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMMS)) operates
a mandatory social insurance scheme for all Mexicans
working in the formal sector. Migrant workers in
the country, whether temporary or permanent

112

Basic income
security for
persons in active
age unable to earn
sufficient income

Basic Income
security for
persons in old age

residents, and Mexicans working abroad can enrol
on a voluntary basis. The People’s Insurance (Seguro
Popular) programme provides access to healthcare for
households that have no members currently registered
with a Mexican social security institution. It benefits
unemployed and underemployed persons and workers
in the informal economy and allows the voluntary
enrolment of nationals living abroad and foreign
nationals employed temporarily in Mexico; however,
health services must be provided in Mexico, not abroad.
Returning migrants can apply for membership in the
programme locally and Mexicans working abroad can
register their family members who have remained in
Mexico at any Mexican consulate. The programme
is free of charge for the poorest households; others
must pay an annual fee. In practice, however, very few
households pay a premium. While the programme
is funded by the Federal Government and managed
by State authorities, health services are delivered by
municipal governments (Lopez-Garcia et al. 2019).

The Recommendation promotes a set of principles that should be applied during its implementation under the overall and primary
responsibility of the State. Of particular relevance to migrants’ rights are the following: entitlement to benefits prescribed by national
law; universality of protection based on social solidarity; protection of beneficiaries’ rights and dignity; non-discrimination, gender
equality and responsiveness to special needs; progressive realization; and tripartite participation and consultation with representatives
of persons concerned, including migrants in so far as their interests are affected.

131

132

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Box 5.6 Unilateral measures implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic
In light of the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic, a number of countries of origin and destination have
taken measures, including unilaterally, to protect not only their own nationals but migrants in their territory,
irrespective of status.
As mentioned throughout this Chapter, countries may adopt unilateral short-term prevention, protection,
treatment and informational measures based on the principle of equality of treatment and non-discrimination. Access to quality healthcare is of the utmost importance during a pandemic, particularly in the case
of COVID-19 since testing and treatment is essential to the health of a country’s population.
Examples:
► France and Spain have extended migrants’ residence permits for three additional months in order to
ensure broad access to healthcare.
► Portugal has regularized the status of non-nationals, including asylum seekers with pending applications, entitling them to, among other things, healthcare, social support, employment and housing. The
Government has also given foreign residents equal access to treatment under the National Health Service
on the same basis as regular beneficiaries.
► The province of British Columbia in Canada has given short-term migrant workers access to the country’s
Medical Service Plan.
► Colombia is providing free medical consultations to migrants and refugees with COVID-19 symptoms,
regardless of their migration status.
► Qatar is providing migrants with medical services, including COVID-19 testing and quarantine services,
free of charge.
Countries can also expand the scope of their contributory and non-contributory schemes, provide income
support and ensure that migrant workers are aware of protection, prevention and treatment measures and
of their social protection rights during the COVID-19 crisis.
Examples:
► As part of its COVID-19 economic response package, New Zealand has announced that international
seasonal migrant workers are entitled to government funding if they fall ill, must isolate themselves while
working in New Zealand (from the start date of their contract) or cannot work because their employer’s
business is affected by the lockdown.
► Italy’s online JUMA portal provides refugees and asylum seekers with access to information on COVID-19
in 15 languages.
► Brazil is providing unemployed, self-employed and informal workers, including migrant workers with
irregular status, with up to three months of emergency basic monthly income.
Source: ILO 2020a

►5.3 Complementary measures
In addition to legal barriers and exclusions, including
in the administration and delivery of social protection
benefits, migrant workers may face practical barriers
that hinder their effective access to social protection.
Statutory coverage through unilateral measures,
bilateral/multilateral social security agreements,
bilateral labour agreements and MoUs should be
complemented by measures to address these barriers
(identified in Chapter 1).

In order to address a lack of information or
understanding, countries can:
► raise awareness of migrant workers’ social
protection rights;
► conduct
communication
and
information
campaigns on ways to access available social
protection schemes and benefits;
► translate information materials, forms, websites
and other relevant information into the appropriate languages;

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

► provide pre-departure training and briefings upon
arrival and return;

► strengthen the capacities of labour inspectors, the
judiciary and other enforcement officers.

► make information available through migrant
resource centres, embassies/consulates, televisions, radio and social media.

In order to address a lack of contributory capacity or
other financial challenges, countries can:

In order to address cultural barriers, discrimination
and stigmatization, countries can:
► consider anti-discrimination and zero-tolerance
campaigns and actions challenging negative
stereotypes and stigmatization;
► mainstream gender and non-discrimination issues
into social protection strategies and schemes
relevant to migrant workers (such as entitlement
to parental leave);
► recognize domestic work as work covered by the
labour laws in line with the ILO Domestic Workers
Convention, 2011 (No. 189).
In order to address lengthy and complex administrative
procedures and geographical barriers, countries can:
► consider initiatives designed to reach out to groups
such as migrant agricultural workers in remote
areas using, among other things, boats, buses,
mobile phones, radio and social media;
► harmonize and simplify procedures and data
collection/sharing through, among other things,
the use of innovative IT systems;
► provide services that help migrant workers to
register for and claim benefits;
► ensure an adequate number of well-trained social
security administration staff, labour attachés
and consular staff, social and healthcare workers
and other stakeholders who provide services to
migrant workers.
In order to compensate for the failure to enforce
policies, laws and agreements and to ensure migrants’
access to justice, countries can:
► facilitate access to complaint or conflict resolution
mechanisms;
► provide pro bono legal support and free advice
and services;

► enhance fiscal space or investment in social
protection (ILO 2015; Ortiz, Cummins and
Karunanethy 2017);113
► subsidize the contributions of migrant workers or
refugees, including from external resources (international solidarity).
In order to address the lack of policy coherence and
evidence-based implementation, countries can:
► collect data and statistics, including on migrant
workers’ social protection through, for example,
the ILO Social Security Inquiry (SSI);114
► ensure monitoring and evaluation and conduct
impact assessments;
► exchange good practices and facilitate SouthSouth learning;
► conduct rapid assessments during crises such as
the COVID-19 pandemic in order to gain knowledge
and a better understanding of the impact of the
crisis on the social protection of migrant workers.
In order to address a lack of representation, organization and effective social dialogue, countries can:
► enable freedom of association and collective
bargaining;
► support workers’ organizations that lobby for
better working conditions – including social
security coverage – and provide their members
with information about workers’ rights and obligations and other services;
► consult migrant workers and workers’ and
employers’ organizations during the development,
implementation and monitoring of laws, policies
and schemes relating to migrant workers’ social
protection;
► facilitate effective social dialogue in order to build
consensus on migrant workers’ social protection,
ensure more sustainable extension strategies and
forge stronger social cohesion;

113

Options include reallocating public expenditure, increasing tax revenue, expanding social security contributions, reducing debt/debt
servicing fees, curtailing illicit financial flows, increasing aid, tapping into fiscal reserves and introducing a more accommodative
macroeconomic framework.

114

For more information,
secsoc_14063.pdf.

see:

https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---soc_sec/documents/presentation/wcms_

133

134

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► facilitate cooperation with relevant civil society
organizations as appropriate in order to enhance
the representation of migrant workers.
Examples:
► In 2019, the Jesuit Service for Migrants, a
Chilean NGO that promotes the social inclusion
of migrant workers and refugees, conducted an
information campaign on the social protection
rights of migrant workers with a focus on
the country’s national pension funds. The
campaign, entitled “Social Protection without
Distinction”, was funded by the Fund for
Pension Education. Through tutorial videos,
brochures in various languages, radio spots and
a website with online resources, the campaign
raised awareness of the importance of migrant
workers’ social protection and of the principle
of equality of treatment between nationals and
non-nationals. It provided information on the
existing legal framework and explained how
to access social benefits and the benefits for
migrants of paying contributions under the
national social security system.
► In the Philippines, the OWWA offers predeparture training for migrant domestic
workers, including language instruction and
information on workers’ rights and obligations
and the culture of the country of employment.
► In 2013, the Moldovan Government launched
a communication campaign on bilateral social
security agreements in order to raise migrant
workers’ awareness of their social security
rights through information leaflets and video
spots (ILO 2014).
► The Jordan Social Security Corporation (SSC)
has established a network of medical centres
abroad for migrant workers who require a
medical examination in order to register with
the national social security scheme. It also
provides e-payment cards to facilitate payments
at designated banks (Hempel 2010).

► 5.4 Other initiatives
In order to extend social protection to migrant workers,
policymakers may wish to consider the various policy
options presented in this and other chapters of this
Guide. In the absence of state-led social protection
mechanisms, migrant workers may decide to
contribute to private insurance mechanisms, including
community-based schemes such as health mutuals,
and in some cases may opt for private insurance in
order to complement their benefits under public social
security schemes.
For many migrant workers, it is important to ensure
that family members who remain in their country of
origin can also benefit from social protection coverage
by sending a portion of their income to their relatives115
in order to cover, among other things, the costs of
healthcare. It is important to stress that reliance on
remittances to support the social security systems of
countries of origin shifts the burden of coverage from
the State to the migrants, who should not be responsible for the provision of minimum services in their
home countries. Excessive reliance on remittances
from both the country of origin and the families can
place an additional burden on migrants who are already
required to pay taxes and contributions under the host
country’s system. Moreover, because remittances
are private resources, they can increase inequality in
the country of origin if, in practice, only the families
of migrants have access to social security. Financial
education programmes can help these workers and
their families to make informed decisions on the use of
remittances and other sources of funds, including for
social protection contributions.116
The ILO has carried out research117 on migrant workers’
remittances, microfinancing and the feasibility of
using a portion of their remittances to develop health
microinsurance products in origin countries such as
Comoros, Mali and Senegal in order to see whether
these initiatives can complement state-led measures
and fill protection gaps for specific groups of migrant
workers and their families.
While migrant workers who lack access to national
public social protection schemes may wish to consider
private and microinsurance schemes, whether
community-based or not, these do not relieve the State
of its responsibility in that regard.118

115

In cooperation with the ILO’s Labour Migration Branch and Social Protection Department in Geneva, the ILO Regional Office for Africa
implemented a project on extending social security coverage to African migrant workers (MIGSEC) with financial support from the
Government of Germany. For more information, see: https://africa-eu-partnership.org/en/success-stories/migsec-project-extendingsocial-protection-migrant-workers-and-their-families-africa.

116

The ILO has developed financial training tools and programmes in order to help migrant workers to make informed choices and develop
the knowledge and skills required for responsible budgeting, including spending, saving, borrowing and investing. Financial education
can help migrants in destination countries to manage their budgets and provide useful support to their families back home.

117

For more information, see: http://www.impactinsurance.org/projects/lessons/feasibility-resource-mobilization-migrant-health and
https://www.social-protection.org/gimi/gess/ShowTheme.action?id=2325.

118

Paragraph 3 of the ILO Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202).

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

►5.5 Conclusion
As shown throughout this chapter, countries of
origin and employment can unilaterally extend social
protection to migrant workers in the absence of bilateral
or multilateral social security agreements or in order
to ensure more universal and comprehensive social
protection coverage of workers, including migrant
workers. This can be done in a number of ways.
Countries of destination may consider measures
classified as contributory, non-contributory or a mixture
of both based on the principle of equality of treatment
enshrined in various human rights instruments and
ILO Conventions. Contributory measures may include:
(i) establishing the right of migrant workers to social
security through national Constitutions and provisions
on equality of treatment in national legislation; (ii)
allowing migrant workers to enrol in national social
protection schemes on the basis of equality of
treatment; (iii) authorizing the payment of benefits
abroad to qualifying non-nationals (exportability) on an
equal basis with nationals; and (iv) reducing or limiting
the qualifying criteria or minimum conditions for certain
benefits. Non-contributory measures seek to ensure
equality of treatment between nationals and non-nationals in respect of non-contributory schemes financed
from public funds (such as healthcare) or flexibility with
respect to residence or other qualifying requirements
for specific categories of migrant workers or economic
sectors.
It is important to include migrant workers in national
social protection schemes and to ensure equality of
treatment. Such measures reduce unfair competition
between migrant workers and nationals by establishing
a level playing field whereas excluding migrant workers
from contributory social security schemes may create a
perverse incentive to recruit them as cheap labour, thus,
increasing the risk of social dumping.
Countries of origin may also consider contributory
and non-contributory measures in order to provide a
degree of protection to their nationals abroad, returning
migrants and family members who have remained in
the home country. These include (i) allowing migrant
workers and their dependents to enrol or retain
membership in a social security scheme by establishing
voluntary/mandatory schemes or welfare funds; (ii)
allowing these workers to maintain the rights acquired
in their country of origin and authorizing the payment
of benefits abroad; (iii) ensuring flexibility in the design
of the scheme and assistance with qualifying conditions
and minimum requirements; and (iv) allowing migrants
to access national social protection floor benefits in line
with the guidance provided by the ILO Social Protection
Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202). In so doing,
countries of origin provide the necessary guarantees
to ensure that migrant workers and their families,
including returning migrants and their dependents

have access to essential healthcare and basic income
security throughout their life cycle.
International labour standards provide essential
guidance on the design and implementation of such
unilateral measures. Unilateral measures vary widely
from one country to another and depend on the characteristics of the migrant workers to be covered. There
is no single measure that provides comprehensive
protection, but rather a menu of complementary
options that should be considered. It is also important
to ensure that such measures fill social protection
gaps in the absence of coordination agreements or
where the existing agreements have limited scope and
reach. Lastly, each of the measures adopted should
be designed, managed, financed and implemented
through social dialogue.
When developing unilateral measures, it is essential to:
► ensure that national policies and legislation accord
equal treatment to nationals and non-nationals
based on the principles of equality of treatment and
non-discrimination and in line with international
human rights instruments and international labour
standards;
► aim for a progressive approach combining several
unilateral measures in addition to the conclusion of
bilateral and multilateral social security agreements
since no single measure can give migrant workers
full access to their social protection rights;
► consider the conclusion and enforcement of
bilateral and multilateral social security agreements
since these agreements are the most effective way
to ensure that migrant workers have full access to
their social protection rights and are the only mechanism that ensures the maintenance of rights in the
course of acquisition;
► plan, design, monitor and implement unilateral
social protection measures for migrant workers
based on social dialogue and support these
workers’ right to freedom of association and
collective bargaining;
► take into account the needs and characteristics
of specific groups of migrant workers, including,
among others, domestic workers, seasonal agricultural workers, workers in an irregular situation (see
Chapter 6), refugees and other forcibly displaced
persons (see Chapter 7), seafarers, posted workers
and frontier workers;
► ensure policy coherence and coordination with the
relevant national immigration laws and regional
policies in order to avoid protection gaps and ensure
that social protection laws, polices and measures
are effectively inclusive of all migrant workers;
► address practical barriers that migrant workers
face in accessing social protection through complementary measures.

135

136

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Bibliography
Australia, Department of Social Services. 2019. Social Security Payments: Residence Criteria. https://
www.dss.gov.au/about-the-department/international/policy/social-security-paymentsresidence-criteria#7.
Avato, Johanna, Rachel Sabates-Wheeler and Johannes Koettl. 2009. Definitions, Good Practices, and
Global Estimates on the Status of Social Protection for International Migrants. World Bank.
CESCR (UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights). 2008. General Comment No. 19:
The Right to Social Security.
FRA (European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights). 2011. Fundamental Rights of Migrants in an
Irregular Situation in the European Union. Vienna.
France, Government. 2019. Assurance maladie d’un étranger en France. https://www.service-public.
fr/particuliers/vosdroits/F12859.
Hirose, Kenichi, Milos Nikac and Edward Tamagno. 2011. Social Security for Migrant Workers: A Rightsbased Approach. Geneva: ILO.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2011. General Survey Concerning Social Security Instruments
in Light of the 2008 Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization. ILC.100/III(1B).
–––. 2013a. Observation (CEACR), Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97) –
Philippines. http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:13100:0::NO:13100:P13100_COMMENT_
ID:3081449:NO.
–––. 2013b. Helping Moldovan Migrant Workers to Enjoy Social Security and Receive Pensions at Home.
https://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/mission-and-objectives/features/WCMS_232972/
lang--en/index.htm.
–––. 2015. Fiscal Space for Social Protection: Options Exist Even in the Poorest Countries. https://www.
social-protection.org/gimi/RessourcePDF.action?ressource.ressourceId=53244.
–––. 2018. Reversing Pension Privatizations: Rebuilding Public Pension Systems in Eastern Europe and
Latin
America.
https://www.ilo.org/secsoc/information-resources/publications-and-tools/
books-and-reports/WCMS_648574/lang--en/index.htm.
–––. 2019a. General Survey concerning the Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202),
ILC.108/III(B).
–––. 2020a. Social Protection for Migrant Workers: A Necessary Response to the COVID-19 Crisis. https://
www.ilo.org/secsoc/information-resources/publications-and-tools/Brochures/WCMS_748979/
lang--en/index.htm.
–––.2020b. ILO Sectoral Brief: COVID-19 and the Health Sector. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/
public/---ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/briefingnote/wcms_741655.pdf.
–––.2021. ILO Global Estimates on International Migrant Workers - Results and Methodology – Third
edition.
–––. Forthcoming. Country Brief on Healthcare for Undocumented Migrants.
ILO, IOM and OSCE (Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe). 2006. Handbook on
Establishing Effective Labour Migration Policies in Countries of Origin and Destination.
IOPS (International Organisation of Pension Supervisors). 2009. IOPS Country Profiles – Ukraine.
http://www.iopsweb.org/resources/45319940.pdf.
ISSA (International Social Security Association). Forthcoming. Database of Social Security Agreements.
Japan, Government Pension Service. 2020. Lump-sum Withdrawal Payments. https://www.nenkin.
go.jp/international/english/lumpsum/lumpsum.html.
López García, Ana Isabel and Pedro Orraca-Romano. 2019. “International Migration and Universal
Healthcare Access: Evidence from Mexico’s ‘Seguro Popular’”. Oxford Development Studies 47
(2): 171–187. https://ideas.repec.org/a/taf/oxdevs/v47y2019i2p171-187.html.

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

Maddouri, Kamel. 2011. Protection sociale des travailleurs Tunisiens migrants: examen critique des
dispositifs nationaux et internationaux. Florence, Italy: European University Institute.
MPI (Migration Policy Institute). 2007. Protecting Overseas Workers: Lessons and Cautions from the
Philippines. Washington, DC. https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/publications/
MigDevInsight_091807.pdf.
OHCHR (Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights). 2014. The Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights of Migrants in an Irregular Situation.
Olivier, Marius. 2017. “Social Protection for Migrant Workers Abroad: Addressing the Deficit via
Country-of-origin Unilateral Measures?”. Migration Research Leaders Syndicate: Ideas to Inform
International Cooperation on Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, edited by M. McAuliffe and M.
Klein Solomon. Geneva: International Organization for Migration (OIM).
–––. 2018. Social Protection for Migrant Workers in ASEAN: Developments, Challenges, and Prospects.
Geneva: ILO.
Ortiz, Isabel, Matthew Cummins and Kalaivani Karunanethy. 2017. “Fiscal Space for Social Protection
and the SDGs: Options to Expand Social Investments in 187 Countries”, Extension of Social
Security Working Paper No. 48.
Philippines, Philippines Overseas Workers Welfare Administration. n.d. Annual Report 2010. https://
www.owwa.gov.ph/index.php/about-owwa/annual-reports.
–––. n.d. Annual Report 2013. https://www.owwa.gov.ph/index.php/about-owwa/annual-reports.
–––. n.d. “Department of Labour and Employment: Overseas Workers Welfare Administration”.
http://www.owwa.gov.ph.
–––. n.d. F.A.Q. http://www.owwa.gov.ph/?q=content/faq.
Ruiz, Neil G. and Dovelyn Agunias Rannveig. 2008. Protecting Temporary Workers: Migrant Welfare
Funds from Developing Countries. Migration and Development Brief No.7. World Bank.
Sabates-Wheeler, Rachel. 2009. “The Impact of Irregular Status on Human Development Outcomes
for Migrants”, Human Development Research Paper Series No. 2009. United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/19209/1/MPRA_paper_19209.pdf.
Sabates-Wheeler, Rachel, and Johannes Koettl. 2010. “Social Protection for Migrants: The Challenges
of Delivery in the Context of Changing Migration Flows”. International Social Security Review
63:3–4.
Spencer, Sarah and Vanessa Hughes. 2015. Outside and In: Legal Entitlements to Health Care and
Education for Migrants with Irregular Status in Europe. Oxford, UK: Centre on Migration Policy
and Society (COMPAS). https://www.compas.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/PR-2015-Outside_
In_Mapping.pdf.
Sri Lanka, Bureau of Foreign Employment. n.d. “Benefits of the Insurance Coverage”. http://slbfe.lk/
page.php?LID=1andPID=110.
–––. n.d. Annual Statistical Report of Foreign Employment–2012. http://slbfe.lk/page.
php?LID=1andMID=54.
–––. n.d. “Table 9. Total Departures for Foreign Employment by Country 2008–2012”. http://www.
slbfe.lk/file.php?FID=56.
Switzerland, Federal Office of Public Health. n.d. “Health insurance: Requirement to obtain
insurance for persons resident in Switzerland”. https://www.bag.admin.ch/bag/en/home/
versicherungen/krankenversicherung/krankenversicherung-versicherte-mit-wohnsitz-in-derschweiz/versicherungspflicht.html.
Taha, Nurulsyahirah, Karin Astrid Siegmann and Mahmood Messkoub. 2015. “How portable is social
security for migrant workers? A review of the literature”. International Social Security Review 68:
95-118.

137

138

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Tangcharoensathien, Viroj, Aye Aye Thwin and Walaiporn Patcharanarumol. 2016. Implementing
health insurance for migrants, Thailand. WHO.
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economics and Social Affairs). 2018. Promoting Inclusion
Through Social Protection: Report on the World Social Situation 2018.
–––. 2019. International Migration 2019: Report.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2009. Human Development Report 2009:
Overcoming Barriers: Human Mobility and Development.
US (United States of America), Social Security Administration (SSA). 2008. “Social Security Payment
Requirements for Most North, Central and South American Citizens Living Outside the United
States”. https://www.ssa.gov/international/61-011.pdf.
–––. 2014. “Social Security Programs throughout the World: Asia and the Pacific, 2014. Jordan”.
“https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/2014-2015/asia/jordan.html.
–––. n.d. “Social Security Payments Outside the United States”. https://www.ssa.gov/international/
payments.html.
Van Hempel, Frank. 2010. “Voluntary Insurance Provisions in National Social Security Schemes:
Unilateral Actions of the Countries of Origin”, ILO Extension of Social Security Working Paper
No. 26. ILO.

Chapter 5
Unilateral measures in countries of origin and employment

139

140

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

141

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific
groups of migrant workers

142

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Key messages
► Migrant workers are a heterogeneous group. Their migration status, type of employment contract, duration
of stay, skills set, income level and demographic characteristics, as well as the industry or sector in which they
work, influence their access to comprehensive social protection.
► Many international human rights instruments and international labour standards establish the social security
rights of migrant workers, including migrant domestic workers, seasonal agricultural migrants and migrants
in an irregular situation who face particular difficulties in accessing social protection.
► The unique characteristics and needs of these groups should be taken into account when developing and
implementing policies or mechanisms aimed at extending social protection. States should also ensure
coherence between migration, employment and social protection policies and strategies.

Migrant domestic workers
► The Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189) and the Domestic Workers Recommendation, 2011 (No. 201)
are designed to ensure domestic workers’ access to decent work and enjoyment of their social protection rights.
Both instruments include explicit provisions on migrant domestic workers. A number of other instruments119
are also relevant to migrant domestic workers’ social protection.
► Migrant domestic workers face specific barriers to social protection, including exclusion from coverage under
labour and social security laws, failure to recognize domestic work as work, inability to meet eligibility criteria,
limited organization and representation, and other administrative problems linked to the nature of their work
(multiple employers, private households, unpredictable working hours and lack of written contracts).
► There is limited monitoring and enforcement of compliance with respect to domestic work, including through
labour inspections. This exacerbates the vulnerability of these workers, particularly the foreign nationals
among them, and promotes an environment that subjects them to labour law and human rights abuses such
as physical violence, forced labour and trafficking.
► In order to adequately extend social protection to migrant domestic workers, countries must ensure the
coverage of all domestic workers under labour and social security laws and/or social security and labour
agreements.
► The implementation of national SPFs in countries of origin and destination would give migrant domestic
workers’ at least a minimum level of social protection and a higher level of benefits in line with the relevant
ILO instruments.
► It is particularly important to simplify and adapt eligibility criteria and administrative procedures in order to
ensure that domestic workers have effective access to social protection.

Migrant seasonal agricultural workers
► The ILO Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention, 2001 (No. 184) and Employment Promotion and Protection
against Unemployment Convention, 1988 (No. 168) include provisions that are relevant to migrant seasonal
agricultural workers; the former reaffirms the principle of equality of treatment between agricultural workers
and other workers in access to social security and the latter states that they should enjoy protection from
unemployment.

119

Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention, 1952 (No. 102), Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202), Equality of
Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No. 118), Maintenance of Social Security Rights Convention, 1982 (No. 157), Maintenance
of Social Security Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167), Medical Care and Sickness Benefits Convention, 1969 (No. 130), Maternity
Protection Convention, 2000 (No. 183), Maternity Protection Convention (Revised), 1952 (No. 103), Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143), Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97), Migrant Workers Recommendation,
1975 (No. 151), Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997 (No. 181) and Transition from the Informal to the Formal Economy
Recommendation, 2015 (No. 204).

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

► Migrant seasonal agricultural workers face various specific obstacles in their efforts to access social protection
owing to the unpredictable, informal and temporary nature of their work, which may prevent them from meeting the minimum requirements for certain benefits, even though they contributed to the relevant schemes.
► Policy options for the extension of social protection coverage to these workers and their families include:
1.

the conclusion and enforcement of social security agreements that ensure equality of treatment and the
portability of acquired rights and rights in the course of acquisition across countries;

2.

the inclusion of social security provisions in temporary workers programmes or bilateral labour agreements;

3.

the adoption of flexible, unilateral measures that ensure equality of treatment and allow these workers to
meet the qualifying conditions and minimum requirements of the scheme. These may include retroactive
payment of missed contributions; allowing the totalization of non-consecutive periods, lump-sum provisions and the reimbursement of contributions upon exit from the scheme;

4.

complementary measures that address the numerous administrative, practical and organizational
obstacles that these workers face, including remote workplaces, long working hours and short stay in the
country of destination.

Migrants in an irregular situation
► Many international instruments, such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), state that everyone – including, by
implication, migrants with irregular status and workers in the informal economy – is entitled to social security
as a human right. This is supported by Part III of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families, which establishes that all migrants, irrespective of their
legal status, have the right to social security.
► The Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143) and the Migrant Workers
Recommendation (No. 151) are relevant to migrant workers in an irregular situation; they establish that the
principle of equality of treatment is applicable to migrant workers and members of their families, who should
be able to enjoy the basic human rights and certain other rights arising out of past employment.
► Migrant children in an irregular situation are a particularly protected category; their right to full social protection even in the absence of legal residence status is affirmed in the Social Protection Floors Recommendation,
2012 (No. 202) and has been mentioned on several occasions by the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child.
► The right to health of migrants in an irregular situation is firmly rooted in international human rights
instruments (UDHR, ICESCR), which require States parties to guarantee, at a minimum, access to emergency
healthcare.
► Migrant workers in an irregular situation are often forced to work in the informal economy without access to
social protection. They also face a higher risk of exploitation and hazardous working conditions.
► In order to provide a minimum level of social protection, and particularly access to essential healthcare, to
these workers, countries may wish to consider the unilateral extension of one or more benefits, including
coverage under national SPFs. Regularization campaigns are another option to be pursued.

143

144

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

►Introduction

►6.1 Migrant domestic workers120

Migrant workers are a heterogeneous group. Their
migration status, type of employment contract, duration
of stay, skills set, income level and demographic characteristics, as well as the industry or sector in which they
work, influence their access to comprehensive social
protection. The unique characteristics and needs of
these different migrant groups should be taken into
account when developing and implementing policies
or mechanisms aimed at extending social protection.
Migrant domestic workers, seasonal agricultural
workers and migrant workers in an irregular situation
represent a significant proportion of migrant workers
and face particular difficulties in accessing social
protection. The objective of this chapter is to identify
the specific obstacles, international legal framework
and policy options of relevance to these three groups
of migrant workers.

According to ILO estimates, in 2013 there were 11.5
million migrant domestic workers accounting for
approximately 7.7 per cent of all migrant workers and
17.2 per cent of all domestic workers worldwide (ILO
2015a). With ageing societies and changing family
structures, labour market demand for domestic
workers, and thus for migrant domestic workers, is
likely to continue to grow. The ILO estimates that 49.9
per cent of domestic workers are legally covered for at
least one social security benefit, however 81.2 per cent
of domestic workers are currently not contributing to
social security (ILO 2021d). This work, performed mainly
in private households, has features that can to some
extent explain the difficulty of extending coverage
to domestic workers, who are likely to have multiple
employers, no written contract and unpredictable hours
of work and payment of wages. In many countries,
the lack of political will to address protection gaps is
another major constraint that is reflected in the limited
coverage of domestic work under national labour laws.
Figure 6.1 Global situation of the statutory coverage of social s
In addition, limited
monitoring and enforcement of
workers (2015)
the regulations governing domestic work, including
through labour inspections, makes these workers
highly vulnerable.

Figure 6.1 Global situation of the statutory coverage of social security for domestic
workers
(2015)6.1 Global situation of the statutory coverage of social security for domestic workers
► Figure
(2021)

Source: ILO Social Protection Department database
tion for domestic
Mandatory coverage
Voluntary coverage
Ongoing measures
Without enough information
Without coverage

Source: ILO
2021c ILO Social Protection Department database on Social ProtecSource:
120

tion for domestic

The information contained in this section is also available in a policy brief format: Expanding Social Security Coverage to Migrant Domestic
Workers (ILO
2016b).
Mandatory
coverage

Voluntary coverage
Ongoing measures

er of

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

A breakdown by region (see Figure 6.2) shows that
in 2013, the largest percentage of migrant domestic
workers were employed in South-East Asia and the
Pacific (19.4 per cent), followed by Northern, Southern
and Western Europe (19.2 per cent), the Arab States
per cent)
and East Asia
per cent). For
absolute
migrant (27.4
domestic
workers,
by(9.5
subregion
(2013)
numbers, see Figure 9 below.
► Figure 6.2 Number of migrant domestic
workers, by subregion (2013)
Southern Asia

3.8
19.2

Northern, Southern and Western Europe
Northern Africa

0.6

Eastern Europe

0.7

Central And Western Asia

2.2
5

Sub-Saharan Africa

19.4

South-Eastern Asia and the Paciﬁc
Northern America

5.5
6.5

Latin America and the Caribbean

9.5

Eastern Asia

27.4

Arab States
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Source: ILO Global estimates on migrant workers 2015

The challenges faced by domestic workers with regard
to social protection coverage are even more acute for
migrant domestic workers. Indeed, “approximately 14
per cent of countries whose social security systems
provide some type of coverage for domestic workers
do not extend the same rights to migrant domestic
workers” (ILO 2016b). These workers may also face
obstacles to coverage owing to application of the
principle of territoriality or nationality, their migration
status or the temporary nature of their employment.
Under these circumstances, extending social protection
does not simply contribute to their economic and
social welfare; it is an indispensable component of
strategies aimed at gender equality, poverty reduction
and combating social exclusion.
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) No. 1.3
“Implement appropriate national social protection
systems for all, including [social protection] floors
[…]”121 specifically recognizes the importance of
social protection policies that cover women and,
more specifically, domestic workers (Target 5.4). The
establishment of national SPFs has been endorsed not
only by the UN but by, among others, the Group of 20
and the tripartite representatives of the ILO member
States when adopting the Social Protection Floors
Recommendation (No. 202) in 2012.

e: ILO Global estimates on migrant workers 2015

Figure 6.3 Number of migrant domestic workers per region, 2013
► Figure 6.3 Number of migrant domestic workers per region, 2013

200,000
80,000

3,210,000

640,000

70,000

1,100,000

440,000

750,000

580,000

2,240,000

3,160,000

Source: ILO 2016b

121

For more information, see: SDG 1.3. Social Protection Systems for all, including and Floors, Key to Eradicating Poverty and Promoting
Prosperity.

145

146

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

6.1.1 The international legal framework
as it applies to migrant domestic
workers
The ILO standards include Conventions, which impose
legally binding obligations on ratifying member States,
and Recommendations, which provide general or
technical guidelines. Both contribute to achieving
the ILO’s objective of extending social protection to
all. Although there is no specific instrument aimed at
securing social security rights for migrant domestic
workers, there is an existing framework of overlapping
technical provisions on the expansion of social security
coverage to include them.
► Figure 6.4 Intersecting provisions on

Figure 6.4 Intersecting
provisions
on migrant
domestic
workers
migrant
domestic
workers
under
ILO under ILO
instruments
instruments

ILO social security
instruments

ILO domestic
workers
instruments

ILO migrant
workers
instruments

6.1.1.1 ILO instruments on the protection of
domestic workers
Since domestic workers are indeed workers, all
ILO instruments cover and protect them unless
otherwise stated.122 The following instruments contain
non-exhaustive provisions of relevance to the social
protection of migrant domestic workers.
The Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189)
establishes that domestic workers should enjoy the
same rights as other workers with respect to terms of

122

employment, minimum age of employment, working
conditions, hours of work, wages, social protection,
access to justice and living conditions. The Convention
provides for the progressive extension of social security
to domestic workers, including migrant domestic
workers. It also includes measures to protect domestic
workers from violence, harassment and other abusive
practices such as retention of wages, confiscation of
identification documents, long working hours, lack of
rest periods, un-decent living and working conditions
and lack of access to healthcare and social protection
benefits, which can lead to exploitive situations and
forced labour. Article 1 defines “domestic work” as
“work performed in or for a household or households”
and “domestic worker” as “any person engaged in
domestic work within an employment relationship”
on an “occupational basis”. Article 8(3) states that
“[m]ember States shall take measures to cooperate
with each other to ensure the effective application of
the provisions of this Convention to migrant domestic
workers” and Article 14 establishes that “each Member
shall take appropriate measures, in accordance with
national laws and regulations and with due regard for
the specific characteristics of domestic work, to ensure
that domestic workers enjoy conditions that are not
less favourable than those applicable to workers
generally in respect of social protection, including with
respect to maternity”.
The Domestic Workers Recommendation, 2011 (No.
201) emphasizes the need for equality of treatment
regarding social security and access to entitlements
for migrant domestic workers and calls for bilateral,
regional and multilateral cooperation among member
States in order to ensure migrant domestic workers’
enjoyment of their social security rights.
The Transition from the Informal to the Formal
Economy Recommendation, 2015 (No. 204)
specifically includes migrants and domestic workers
among the groups that are “especially vulnerable
to the most serious decent work deficits in the
informal economy” (para. 7(i)), thus recognizing that
domestic and migrant domestic workers often lack
regular employment status or a formal contract. The
Recommendation promotes building and maintaining
national SPFs and the progressive extension to
all workers, in law and practice, of social security,
maternity protection, decent working conditions and
a minimum wage. It expressly refers to the Domestic
Workers Convention (No. 189) and Recommendation
(No. 201), 2011.

Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189), sixth preambular paragraph.

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

6.1.1.2 ILO Social Security Instruments

6.1.1.3 ILO instruments on migrant workers

The ILO has developed various instruments on social
security that establish the principle of equality of
treatment between nationals and non-nationals. In
practice, however, migrant domestic workers may
be excluded from national legislation and from the
personal scope of social security agreements. The
Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention,
1952 (No. 102) is one of the benchmark ILO instruments that provide for the extension of comprehensive
social security systems. Part XII of the Convention
expressly calls for equality of treatment of non-national and national residents through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation agreements.

Various specific ILO instruments cover migrant workers
and can thus be used to protect migrant domestic
workers.

The Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012
(No. 202) complements Conventions Nos 102 and No.
189. It calls for support for disadvantaged groups and
individuals in the formal and the informal economy
and for the extension of social security coverage to all,
including, at least, all residents and all children (paras
6 and 15).
The Equality of Treatment (Social Security)
Convention, 1962 (No. 118) calls on member States
to grant equality of treatment under their national
social security legislation to the nationals of any other
member State for which the Convention is in force (Art.
3(1)).
The Maintenance of Social Security Rights
Convention, 1982 (No. 157) and its accompanying
Maintenance of Social Security Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167) promote the maintenance of
acquired rights and rights in the course of acquisition
in respect of social security for migrant workers.
The Medical Care and Sickness Benefits Convention,
1969 (No. 130) provides for equality of treatment in
respect of non-nationals who normally reside or work
in the territory of a signatory member State.
The Maternity Protection Convention, 2000 (No.
183) and the Maternity Protection Convention
(Revised), 1952 (No. 103) include provisions on health
and employment protection, minimum maternity
leave and non-discrimination for all employed women,
including domestic workers and others in atypical
forms of dependent work.

The Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions)
Convention, 1975 (No. 143) seeks to ensure equality of
opportunity and treatment between migrant workers
lawfully admitted to the country and nationals on a
number of matters, including social security. It also
stipulates that migrant workers whose situation cannot
be regularized in the country of destination should be
accorded equality of treatment in respect of rights
arising out of past employment as regards remuneration, social security and other benefits.
The Migrant Workers Recommendation, 1975 (No.
151) recalls the provisions of Convention No. 143; it
reiterates the principle of equality of opportunity and
treatment of migrant workers in a regular situation
and members of their families, including with regard
to social security, welfare and benefits provided in
connection with employment. It also expands on the
principle of equality of treatment in respect of rights
arising out of present and past employment (remuneration, social security and other benefits) for migrant
workers who are lawfully resident in the territory of
a member State or whose position has not been or
cannot be regularized. Migrant workers who leave
their country of employment, irrespective of the legality
of their stay, should be entitled to any outstanding
remuneration for work performed, including severance
payments normally due; to benefits which may be due
in respect of any employment injury suffered; and, in
accordance with national practice, to reimbursement of
any social security contributions which have not given
and will not give rise to rights under national laws or
regulations or international arrangements (Art. 34).
The Migration for Employment Convention
(Revised), 1949 (No. 97) contains clauses on the
acquisition by non-national workers of “social security
(that is to say, legal provision in respect of employment
injury, maternity, sickness, invalidity, old age, death,
unemployment and family responsibilities, and any
other contingency which, according to national laws or
regulations, are covered by a social security scheme)”
(Art. 6(1)(b)).
The Private Employment Agencies Convention,
1997 (No. 181) is particularly relevant as it calls for the
adequate protection of workers in relation to, among
other things, statutory social security benefits. This
includes migrants employed by private employment
agencies, which recruit large numbers of migrant
domestic workers in many regions.

147

148

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

6.1.2 Obstacles, protection gaps and
challenges
While there is an array of ILO instruments that can be
used to protect migrant domestic workers, numerous
obstacles hinder the extension of social protection
to them. These may include legal exclusion, complex
procedures and lack of monitoring and inspection,
information and coordination between countries.

6.1.2.1 Legal exclusion
The main challenges to the extension of social
security coverage to migrant domestic workers often
lie in the limitations of national legislation. In many
countries, domestic workers are expressly excluded
from coverage under the labour and social security
laws (ILO 2019a; ILO 2021a); for example, Thailand’s
Social Security Law (1990) does not cover domestic
work. Other countries provide for mandatory health
coverage of domestic workers yet exclude them from
other benefits such as maternity, employment injury
and unemployment protection or pensions (ILO 2017).
Migrant domestic workers may also be subject to
specific exclusions based on job-related factors; many
countries deny them social protection if their earnings
or working hours per household fall below a minimum
threshold (ILO 2019a; ILO 2021a).
Migrant domestic workers may also be excluded
from social protection owing to the length of their
stay in the country, the fact that they work in the
informal economy or due to the irregularity of their
status. Because the principle of territoriality limits the
application of social security legislation to the country in
which it was enacted, these workers may lose coverage
under the social security system of their countries of
origin and have limited or no coverage in their country
of employment; in the absence of effective bilateral
or multilateral social security agreements, they may
also lose coverage when they return to their home
countries (ILO 2011).

6.1.2.2 Complexity or absence of
appropriate procedures
Social security registration and contribution collection
procedures are often designed with enterprises in
mind, yet households are the main employers of
domestic workers in most countries. Procedures that
are time-consuming and difficult to understand raise
transaction costs for all parties concerned. Thus, the
inadequacy of administrative mechanisms is often
a deterrent to social security registration for both
employers and workers (ILO 2019a).

6.1.2.3 Lack of monitoring and inspection
Domestic workers work in a sector that is not easily
monitored and inspected owing to a lack of adequate
policies, laws and tools and to the fact that domestic
work is primarily performed in private households (ILO
2019a). The latter, in particular, complicates inspections as many countries’ legislation requires the head
of household’s consent or prior judicial authorization
before an inspection can be carried out. Moreover,
labour inspectors are seldom instructed on the
particularities of the sector and do not have a good
understanding of the best practices for intervention,
especially where (migrant) domestic work is excluded
from the applicable legislation. These challenges,
together with a lack of the resources required for
the adequate performance of inspections fosters an
environment that subjects domestic workers, particularly those of foreign origin, to labour and human
rights abuses such as physical violence, forced labour
and child labour (ILO n.d.). In Namibia, for example,
although domestic workers employed for at least one
day per week and their employers are required to
register with the Social Security Commission, less than
20 per cent of all domestic workers in the country are
registered (ILO 2013a).

6.1.2.4 Lack of information
Information on migrant domestic workers’ rights may
be unavailable or available only in languages that
they cannot read. As a result, they may not be aware
of existing social protection schemes and entitlements and how to access them. Furthermore, the
fact that these workers often work long hours and
have limited resting periods does not give them the
necessary time and resources to access information
(ILO 2019a). This situation can lead to asymmetry in
negotiations with employers, place migrant domestic
workers at a disadvantage when advocating for their
rights and increase their vulnerability to exploitation
and forced labour. Disseminating information on the
risk of abusive and exploitative situations through the
media, trade unions and other sources can increase
migrant domestic workers’ awareness of the risks that
they may encounter. A lack of accurate information on
the number of migrant domestic workers and their
demographic and socio-economic profiles can also
make it difficult for national administrations to develop
a strategy for providing them with social security
coverage.

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

6.1.2.5 Lack of representation
While workers’ organizations have played an important
role in raising awareness of rights and negotiating
for the extension of protection, domestic workers
are rarely represented by trade unions. In addition
to the usual legal, political and other obstacles that
national workers face, isolation is a serious barrier to
domestic workers’ unionization. Nevertheless, there
are several domestic workers’ organizations around
the world (Fudge and Hobden 2018); for example, the
International Domestic Workers’ Federation (IDWF)
has 80 affiliates in 62 countries as at January 2021123.
In Italy, a national collective agreement on domestic
work, signed by four unions and two employers’
organizations in 2013, specifically recognizes the
social security rights – including sickness, occupational
injury and disease and pension benefits – of domestic
workers (D’Andrea 2020).

6.1.2.6 Lack of coordination between
countries
Migrant domestic workers face multiple barriers to
social security coverage. Even where bilateral and
multilateral social security agreements exist, they
rarely mention migrant domestic workers as a specific
group. General references to workers in international
social security agreements often lead to the exclusion
of migrant domestic workers, especially in countries
where they are not covered under the national
legislation. Nevertheless, bilateral or multilateral
agreements have proved an efficient mechanism for
recognizing, retaining and administering migrant
workers’ right to accumulated benefits in countries of
destination.

6.1.3 From right to reality: Extending
social protection to migrant domestic
workers
Various types of workers, including vulnerable
groups such as migrant workers, engage in full-time,
part-time, live-in or live-out domestic work. States can
opt for various policy options, which are not mutually
exclusive, in order to address the obstacles faced by
migrant domestic workers.
First and foremost, coverage under the national labour
and social security legislation should be extended to
all workers, specifically ensuring the recognition of
domestic work as work and of domestic workers as
workers (ILO 2019a), by expanding coverage under
the existing legislation to include migrant domestic
workers or adopting new legislation that specifically
targets them.
When extending social protection specifically to
migrant domestic workers, States can opt for:
► ratification and application of the relevant ILO
Conventions and Recommendations. The principles and standards established therein, including
the principle of equality of treatment, can be incorporated into domestic law (see section 1.1);
► conclusion and enforcement of bilateral or multilateral social security agreements with a view to
ensuring social security coordination. Good practices for multilateral social security agreements
in respect of migrant workers, including migrant
domestic workers, can be identified (see Chapter 3).

► Box 6.1 Barriers to the extension of social protection to domestic workers

123

Legal exclusion in
national legislation
(nationality, status, type of
employment, etc.)

High number of domestic
workers working in the
informal economy

Restrictions in
contingencies covered

Exclusion linked to specific
characteristics (income,
work-time, number of
employees)

Lack of affordability

Complexity of
administrative procedures

Low social protection
coverage of the national
population in certain
countries

Lack of ratification of
relevant convention

Lack of social security
agreements or bilateral
arrangements with social
security provisions

Lack of information,
difficulty of accessing it
or linguistic and cultural
barriers

Stigmatization and
discrimination

Lack of organization and
representation

For more information, please see The International Domestic Workers Federation.

149

150

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Examples:
► The MERCOSUR Multilateral Social Security
Agreement,124 which entered into force in 2005 and
is recognized as one of the most advanced in the
region owing to its effectiveness and coverage,
includes healthcare, old-age and disability benefits
and ensures the portability of migrant domestic
workers’ pension rights.
► The Ibero-American Multilateral Convention on
Social Security provides for the coordination of
national legislation on pensions, thus guaranteeing
the rights of migrant workers and their families. As
at 2017, it has 15 States parties (Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Paraguay, Peru,
Portugal, Spain, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) and is currently being implemented
in 11 of them (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal,
Spain and Uruguay). While the Convention applies
only to persons who are entitled to social security
in their countries of origin, a fact that significantly
reduces the number of potential beneficiaries, it
has the potential to encompass migrant domestic
workers. Article 8 states that the Convention is fully
applicable in the absence of any bilateral or multilateral social security agreement between States
parties thereto.
► The 2003 Agreement between France and Tunisia
seeks to ensure the social protection of migrant
workers from both countries, including employed
and self-employed persons, unemployed persons
receiving benefits, nationals of one of the two
States parties, refugees and stateless persons.
Hence, it also covers migrant domestic workers.
The Agreement contains provisions on all branches
of social security, covers 54 per cent of the Tunisian
community in France and provides access to
healthcare and social security benefits on the
same basis as French citizens where the condition
of legal residence is met (Maddouri 2011).
Maternity benefits are available with a minimum
contribution period of 10 months prior to the date
of birth. A range of family benefits, (cash benefits;
education, childcare, birth, adoption and disabled
child education allowances; supplementary family
benefits; and housing benefits) are available to
foreign nationals without a minimum employment
or contribution period (Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul
and Binette 2017).

124

► The two bilateral Social Security Agreements signed
by Spain with Morocco and with Ecuador apply to
workers who are or have been subject to the social
security legislation of either migrant-sending
country and to their dependents and survivors. In
addition to the contingencies provided for under
the general social security scheme of Spain, application of the Agreement between Spain and
Morocco includes specific categories of workers
covered by the special schemes of the Spanish social
security system (such as agricultural workers, coal
miners, seafarers, domestic workers and self-employed persons) (Art. 2(1)(B)). The Social Security
Agreement between Spain and Ecuador applies
to all contributory benefits provided through the
Spanish social security system and covers all categories of workers with the exception of public and
civil servants and military personnel (Art. 2(1)(B))
(Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017).
The inclusion of social security provisions in bilateral
labour arrangements (BLAs) and MoUs can be a step
towards the protection of migrant domestic workers’
rights although coverage will also depend on the
relevant national laws and social security agreements,
where these exist. In addition, empowering diplomatic
representations and domestic workers’ unions
to monitor the enforcement of bilateral labour
agreements can help to ensure migrant domestic
workers’ access to social protection.
Example:
► In 2013, Saudi Arabia and the Philippines signed a
bilateral labour in order to better protect Filipino
domestic workers employed in Saudi Arabia.
According to Article 4(2) of this Agreement, the
Ministry of Labour of Saudi Arabia is responsible
for ensuring the welfare and rights of domestic
workers. Nevertheless,
[s]ocial protection with respect to domestic
workers under the Saudi Arabian social security
scheme appears to be almost non-existent.
‘Domestic helpers’ are excluded from the personal
scope of application of the Saudi Arabia Labor Law,
as per Article 7(2). Similarly, the Social Insurance
Law, regulating old-age, disability and survivors
benefits, does not cover ‘Domestic servants’ (art.
5.1e), nor does it cover ‘foreign workers who
usually come to the Kingdom to engage in works
which usually take no more than three months
to complete’ (art.5.1f). However, in October 2013,
the Kingdom’s Council of Ministers approved

Relevant national legislation includes: Argentina, Act No. 25655 of 18 September 2002; Brazil, Legislative Decree No. 451/200 of 15
December 1997; Uruguay, Act No. 17,207 of 14 September 1999; and Paraguay, Act No. 2513 of 14 December 2004.

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

Resolution No. 310 or the Household Regulation on
States can include migrant domestic workers in
Service Workers and Similar Categories aimed at
their social security schemes and programmes on
enhancing legal protection for domestic workers.
a unilateral basis. These schemes may be contribThis recent resolution guarantees certain labour
utory or non-contributory and should be based on the
rights (a weekly rest day; one month leave after
principle of equality of treatment between nationals
two years of service; paid sick leave of no more than
and non-nationals. Transitional measures such as
30
days;
and
end-of-service
benefits
equivalent
to
voluntary coverage, special programmes and differFigure 6.5 Number of countries that have social security provisions for
one-month).
The
only
reference
made
to
social
entiatedare
coverage can be instrumental in achieving
domestic workers with an indication of whether migrant workers
protection
is
the
right
to
healthcare
according
legal
coverage
in the short term, bearing in mind that
also covered
to the rules and regulations of Saudi Arabia”
mandatory coverage may present a challenge to the
(Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette. 2017, 29–30).
social security institutions of countries of origin.
The adoption of unilateral measures, including national
SPFs, is another means of extending social protection
Number of countries
to migrant domestic workers and their families (see
Western Europe
2
Chapter 5). In total, 60.7
per cent of 168 15countries
North
America 2
provide legal protection of
domestic
workers under at
least one social security branch.
covers roughly
3 1
Middle East This
half of all domestic
workers
globally,
with14 coverage
2
Latin America and the Caribbean
varying widely across regions. Nevertheless, only 15
8
3
Asia and the Paciﬁc
per cent of the 168 countries include domestic workers
6
under all branches, as such Africa
less than 6 per cent of
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18legal
domestic workers benefit from 0comprehensive
With coverage of migrants
coverage (ILO 2021c).
No coverage of migrants

Source: ILO 2016a
► Figure 6.5 Number of countries that have
social security provisions for domestic
workers with an indication of whether
migrant workers are also covered

21

Arab States

3

7

5

Asia and the Paciﬁc

2

Latin America and
the Caribbean

7

16

7

18

Americas

16

15

Africa
0

5

10

15

20

25

With coverage of migrants
No coverage of migrants

Source: ILO 2021c

30

Examples:
► In Chile and Italy, migrant domestic workers are
eligible for medical coverage under the general
social security regime; in other countries, they
are covered under special schemes.
► In Ecuador, these workers are offered coverage
through a general scheme managed by the
Social Security Institute.
► In the Philippines, the Overseas Workers
Welfare Administration (OWWA) provides a
range of social services to the country’s 3.8
million migrant workers, including domestic
workers, under the Migrant Workers and
Overseas Filipinos Act (Act No. 8042). The OWWA
provides life and personal accident insurance
and monetary benefits to members who suffer
occupational injuries, illness, or disabilities while
employed abroad. It also facilitates access to
the Philippines Health Insurance (PhilHealth).

Number of countries
Europe and Central Asia

In addition, SPFs can be used in order to extend
social protection to migrant domestic workers in their
countries of origin and destination (see Chapter 5).

35

► In Costa Rica, an employment contract
and individual social security coverage are
preconditions for regularizing migration status.
An unexpected side effect of this is that migrant
domestic workers have a higher level of social
security coverage than national domestic
workers; for example, their rate of maternity
coverage is nearly twice as high.
► In Argentina, the introduction of a universal child
allowance in 2009 closed a social protection gap
for dependents of domestic workers. However,
this benefit is not always applicable to them
as coverage is limited to children of Argentine
nationals and children who have been resident
in the country for at least three years.

151

152

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Box 6.2 Chile and the extension of social protection to all domestic workers, including
migrants
Under Chilean law, migrant workers are subject to the same regulations as nationals. Their access to
social protection benefits and to membership in and coverage under the national social security system
is mandatory. They have access to benefits under the social security system if they have a work permit
and meet certain requirements, such as a minimal period of contributions and legal residence or minimum
length of stay. Most of these benefits are based on private insurance schemes and cover several branches of
social protection, including old-age, unemployment, disability, invalidity, sickness, occupational disease and
maternity. The public system also provides basic and complementary old-age pensions.
Domestic workers are recognized as a specific category of workers in the Labour Code and its regulations apply to migrant domestic workers, regardless of nationality. It should be noted that these regulations require employers to contribute 4.11 per cent of domestic workers’ wages per month to an individual
compensation fund with a benefit payable upon termination of the worker’s contract. In an effort to formalize
domestic work and guarantee workers’ labour and social security rights, a more recent legal reform (Act No.
20,786 (2014)) requires employers to submit a copy of their workers’ employment contracts to the labour
inspectorate and to pay their social security contributions. Chile ratified the Domestic Workers Convention
2011 (No 189) in 2015. It has signed several bilateral agreements on social protection and is a party to the
Ibero-American Multilateral Convention on Social Security.

Complementary measures can be taken in order to
mitigate the administrative, practical and organizational
obstacles faced by migrant domestic workers. These
include awareness-raising campaigns, translation
of essential information on social security schemes
and establishment of complaint mechanisms. Policymakers should facilitate access to social protection
by all groups of domestic workers, by removing
administrative barriers, including through the use of
innovative technologies. Governments can establish
flexible financing mechanisms or introduce differentiated contributory provisions in order to encourage
formalization of the domestic work sector (ILO 2019a).
It is important for policymakers to collaborate with
all relevant ministries to ensure coherence between
migration, employment and social protection policies
and strategies.
Example:
► Argentina is implementing a comprehensive
policy, including tax incentives, simplification
of procedures and an information campaign,
with a view to increasing formalization and
social security coverage of the most un-secure
workers (migrants, domestic workers and
construction workers). As a result, the number
of migrant domestic workers covered by social
security doubled over a period of five years
although the overall number remains low and
enrolment is a challenge.

►6.2 Migrant seasonal agricultural
workers
Approximately 3 billion people – close to half of the
world’s population – live in rural areas and play a significant economic role in the majority of countries. Close
to 28 per cent of the global workforce is employed in the
agricultural sector (ILO 2019a). The regional differences
are, however, significant with the majority of these
workers located in Africa and Asia. Overall, agricultural
work is heavily seasonal with a high demand for labour
during planting and harvest, alternating on a yearly
basis with periods of little or no work. This leads farmers
to make frequent use of casual and seasonal workers,
many of whom are migrants. Moreover, this pattern of
demand has become increasingly unpredictable over
time owing to the rising rate and recurrence of natural
hazards (floods, droughts and so on):

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

153

Figure 6.6 Occurrence and extent of crises, 1980–2012
► Figure 6.6 Occurrence and extent of crises, 1980–2012
Total aﬀected (millions)

Linear (Occurrence)

Linear (Total aﬀected (millions))

600

700

500

600
500

400

400
300

300
200

200

100

12

20

10

08

20

20

06

04

20

20

02

00

20

20

98

19

96

94

19

19

92

90

19

19

88
19

86

84

19

19

19

19

82

100

80

Number of natural disasters per year.

Occurrence

Source: European Commission 2019

Figure 6.7 Global distribution of migrant workers, by broad branch of economic act
At the same time, agricultural work is known for being
poorly paid and physically demanding, often under
difficult working conditions,125 and has lost attractiveness for the young national workforce, who have
gradually been replaced by seasonal migrant workers.

Source: European Commission 2019

These workers are often temporary migrants who
work in host countries for a limited period of time,
after which they are expected to return to their country
of origin or move to another country. The ILO defines
“seasonal workers” as “[…] workers who hold explicit
or implicit contracts of employment where the timing
and duration of the contract is significantly influenced
by seasonal factors such as the climatic cycle, public
holidays and/or agricultural harvests” (ILO 1993, para.
14(g)). Most seasonal migrant workers are low-skilled
and come from lower-income countries in geographical
proximity to the destination country (such as Morocco–
Spain; Mexico–US or Canada and Pacific islands–New
Zealand), although there are exceptions such as berry
pickers from Thailand working in Sweden. The majority
of these migrant workers are employed in the informal
economy.

► Figure 6.7 Global distribution of
international migrant workers, by broad
branch of economic activity, 2019

7.9%

5.9'%
14.2%

35.6%

79.9%
56.4%

Men
Agriculture

Women
Industry

7.1%
26.7%

66.2%

Total
Services

Source: ILO Global estimates on migrant workers 2021

In 2019, about 7 per cent of the total international
migrant workforce – were employed in agriculture (ILO
2021) as compared to 11 per cent in 2013 (ILO 2015a).

Source: ILO Global estimates on migrant workers 2015

125

A trade union consultation organized by the ILO in 2003 showed that in Europe, low wages in agricultural work are the result of an
imbalance of power that allows big supermarket chains to force farmers to produce at low cost and pass the burden on to their workers
by reducing their wages.

154

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

In many parts of the world, the movement of
migrant seasonal agricultural workers is governed
by temporary foreign worker programmes (TFWPs),
which regulate admission based on territory, residence
and employment criteria. These programmes are
administered by one or two government agencies,
which unilaterally or multilaterally set an annual
quota for the maximum number of migrant workers
to be admitted into the country of destination and the
criteria for their selection and recruitment in order to
ensure that the labour force meets the needs of the
sector. Seasonal migration schemes usually operate
over a three-to-nine-month period and contain
provisions encouraging return to the country of origin

following expiration of the temporary work visa. Family
reunification is usually not permitted under such
schemes.

6.2.1 International legal frameworks
of relevance to migrant seasonal
agricultural workers
Many international human rights instruments and
international labour standards guarantee social
security rights to migrant workers (see Chapter 2),
including migrant seasonal agricultural workers:

► Table 6.1 International labour standards of relevance to migrant seasonal agricultural workers
Instrument

Description

Transition from the Informal to the
Formal Economy Recommendation,
2015 (No. 204)

This Recommendation seeks to facilitate the transition of workers and
economic units from the informal to the formal economy while respecting
workers’ fundamental rights and ensuring opportunities for income security,
livelihoods and entrepreneurship.

Social Protection Floors
Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202)

This Recommendation seeks to guarantee, at a minimum, a basic level of
social security for all, including for disadvantaged groups and persons in both
the formal and informal economy. It covers migrant seasonal agricultural
workers (returning workers and family members in their home countries).

Safety and Health in Agriculture
Convention, 2001 (No. 184)

This Convention requires that workers in agriculture be provided with
coverage against occupational injuries and diseases, invalidity and other
work-related health risks through an insurance or social security scheme
providing coverage at least equivalent to that enjoyed by workers in other
sectors (Art. 21).

Private Employment Agencies
Convention, 1997 (No. 181)

This Convention calls for adequate protection of workers, including migrants
(and thus migrant seasonal agricultural workers), employed by private
employment agencies in respect of, among other things, statutory social
security benefits.

Employment Promotion and Protection
against Unemployment Convention,
1988 (No. 168)

This Convention extends and adapts unemployment protection to seasonal
work and its specific occupational circumstances (Arts 17, 18 and 19).

Maintenance of Social Security Rights
Convention, 1982 (No. 157)

This Convention covers migrant seasonal agricultural workers.

Migrant Workers Recommendation,
1975 (No. 151)

This Recommendation covers migrant seasonal agricultural workers.

Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143)

This Convention requires States parties to promote equality of opportunity
and treatment for migrant workers – including migrant seasonal agricultural
workers – and members of their families who are lawfully within their territory
in respect of social security. It also states that migrant workers, irrespective of
status, must enjoy equality of treatment in respect of rights arising out of past
employment as regards remuneration, social security and other benefits.

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

Instrument

Description

Equality of Treatment (Social Security)
Convention, 1962 (No. 118)

This Convention, which calls for equality of treatment in respect of every
branch of social security recognized thereunder, covers migrant seasonal
agricultural workers.

Social Security (Minimum Standards)
Convention, 1952 (No. 102)

This Convention calls for the equality of treatment of non-national and
national residents and covers migrant seasonal agricultural workers.

Migration for Employment Convention
(Revised), 1949 (No. 97)

This Convention contains provisions on the acquisition by non-national
workers – including migrant seasonal agricultural workers who are lawfully
present in a State’s territory – of social security in respect of employment
injury, maternity, sickness, invalidity, old age, death, unemployment, family
responsibilities and any other contingency which, according to national
laws or regulations, is covered by a social security scheme. The CEACR has
expressly included workers with temporary residence status in the scope of
application of Article 6, which mandates equality of treatment with regard to
social security with the exception of benefits that are payable wholly out of
public funds and minimum contribution conditions for pensions.126

The ILO Multilateral Framework on Labour Migration
– Non-binding principles and guidelines for a rightsbased approach (ILO 2006), also includes specific
provisions on the extension of social protection to
migrant seasonal agricultural workers:
► “Principle 8: The human rights of all migrant
workers, regardless of their status, should be
promoted and protected. In particular, all migrant
workers should benefit from the principles and
rights in the 1998 ILO Declaration on Fundamental
Principles and Rights at Work and its Follow-up,
which are reflected in the eight fundamental ILO
Conventions, and the relevant United Nations
human rights Conventions”;
► “Principle 9c: National law and policies should
also be guided by other relevant ILO standards
in the areas of employment, labour inspection,
social security, maternity protection, protection of
wages, occupational safety and health and in such
sectors as agriculture, construction and hotels and
restaurants”.

126

6.2.2 Obstacles, protection gaps and
challenges
Migrant seasonal agricultural workers may be excluded
from social protection by law or in practice.
► The social security systems of the country of destination or origin may not cover seasonal agricultural workers or migrant workers or may cover
them at a lower level of protection, forcing them to
work in the informal economy.
► These workers risk being excluded from the
social protection systems of both their country
of employment, since they have no permanent
residence status, and their home country, since
they are not employed there.
► Moreover, as family reunification is usually
not allowed, the dependents of these workers
usually remain in the country of origin, where
they risk being excluded from the social security
system because the main breadwinner does not
work in that country.

Direct request (CEACR) – adopted 2007, published 97th [International Labour Conference (ILC)] session (2008): Migration for Employment
Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97) – Belize (Ratification: 1983); direct request (CEACR) – adopted 2001, published 90th ILC session (2002):
Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97) – New Zealand (Ratification: 1950).

155

156

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► The nature and duration of seasonal agricultural
work may lead to exclusion from or limited access
to social protection. This situation may be exacerbated by a lack of multilateral or bilateral social
security agreements.
Examples:
► The temporary, relatively limited, duration
of these workers’ contract or stay makes it
particularly difficult for them to gain access to
social protection because they are often unable
to meet the minimum eligibility conditions
for social security benefits in the country of
employment.
► Frequent movement from one country to
another may prevent them from reaching
the minimum number of contribution years
required for certain social security benefits
unless they are able to aggregate the periods of
time spent in multiple countries.
► Their migration cycle can be unpredictable
and they may fall under several different social
security systems in the course of their life.

► Additional factors that may lead to their
exclusion include a lack of an identifiable
employment relationship, low and fluctuating
income, remoteness of their workplace, high
labour mobility and lack of organization.
► These workers may lack incentives to enter the
formal economy and contribute to social security
schemes from which they may not be able to
benefit.
► Language barriers, lack of information on the social
security system, the absence of social networks
and other constraints related to their migrant
status and the nature of their work (remote areas,
long hours and seasonal work) often prevent them
from exercising their rights and accessing social
security schemes, including underlying mechanisms such as complaint and redress mechanisms.
These difficulties are, moreover, exacerbated by
their short stay in the country.
As seasonal agricultural work can be hazardous and
subject to a higher occupational injury rate, it is particularly important to ensure that these workers are eligible
for short-term benefits such as occupational injury
protection, basic healthcare and maternity protection.

► Box 6.3 Further challenges in light of COVID-19
With the outbreak of COVID-19, supply chains, including for agricultural products, have been disrupted and
food security has become an issue for many countries worldwide. Although the pandemic has highlighted
the importance of agricultural workers in sustaining food systems, in some countries they are excluded from
the general protections of labour law (ILO 2016d). Because there is little incentive for national workers to take
these jobs, seasonal foreign worker programmes are being put in place. The COVID-19 pandemic and the
subsequent measures taken (such as border closures and travel bans) have placed a burden on countries
that have historically relied on migrant agricultural workers. Many countries have designated these workers
as “essential” and adopted special measures allowing them to travel or extending their visas in order to give
them access to healthcare services. However, social protection coverage for all is still far from being fully
applied in practice.
It seems likely that this new recognition of agricultural work will lead to a greater focus on decent work
and to a greater appreciation of agriculture work as a profession. Recognizing these workers as essential
entails closing legal loopholes exempting them from coverage under the labour laws and increasing the
consistency of (im)migration, employment and social security regulations. As key stakeholders in this sector,
migrant workers must be able to benefit from pay raises and social protection, including access to healthcare
and other benefits, as and when they become available. Seasonal foreign worker programmes must be
integrated into planned improvements and rather than being designed as a parallel reality.
Source: ILO 2020a

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

6.2.3 From right to reality: Extending
social protection to migrant seasonal
agricultural workers
It is important to ensure that national agricultural
workers are covered by labour and social security laws
as this is a precondition for extending social protection
to agricultural migrant workers.
Countries can take a variety of measures to extend
social protection and ensure equality of treatment for
migrant workers. When considering policy options and
measures for migrant workers in general, countries
should also take into account the specific challenges
and obstacles that migrant seasonal agricultural
workers may face with regard to social protection. These
obstacles are compounded by the duration of their work
and by their migration status, which may prevent them
from meeting the minimum required conditions.
Policy options and examples of the extension of social
protection to migrant seasonal agricultural workers
include:
► Conclusion and enforcement of social security
agreements (bilateral/multilateral) to ensure the
portability of acquired rights and totalization of
contribution periods.
Examples:
► France concluded a bilateral social security
agreement with Morocco, one of the primary
countries of origin of seasonal workers, in
2007 with entry into force as from 2011. This
Agreement expressly includes seasonal workers
in its scope of application and covers all nine
branches of social security, including old-age
benefits.
► EU Directive 2014/36/EU on the conditions of
entry and stay of third-country nationals for the
purpose of employment as seasonal workers
recognizes their right to equal treatment with
nationals of host Member States in respect of
access to social security. However, the Directive
does not cover unemployment and family
benefits and is limited with regard to tax benefits,
education and vocational training.
► Inclusion of social security provisions in bilateral
labour arrangements (BLAs) and temporary
workers programmes

at:

Examples:
► Canada’s
Seasonal
Agricultural
Worker
Programme (SAWP),127 launched in 1966 as part
of its Temporary Foreign Worker Programme
(TFWP),128 facilitates the temporary seasonal
employment of foreign workers through
a system of bilateral labour agreements
between Canada, Mexico and 11 Caribbean
countries.129 Seasonal agricultural workers
from these countries may be employed for up
to eight consecutive months per year for onfarm activities and work related to previously
identified commodities. As Canadian employers
can request specific employees, they have a
significant influence on the composition of the
seasonal workforce (which comprises a larger
proportion of men than women). These bilateral
labour agreements mandate receipt of the
provincial minimum wage and include specific
provisions on social protection.
Employers must ensure that all migrant workers
included in the Programme have registered for
health insurance. Depending on the province,
workers may be covered by the provincial/
territorial (public) health/workplace safety
insurance, private insurance or a combination
of the two. Depending on the option chosen,
the cost may be covered by the migrant, the
employer or both. The agreements state that
“the employer can deduct the cost of nonoccupational medical coverage by way of regular
payroll deduction at a premium rate of [C$]0.90
per day per worker” (Canada 2020). Coverage
includes non-occupational medical insurance
(sickness, accident and hospitalization) and any
other benefit that is in the worker’s interest.
Yet, despite being legally entitled to such
care, migrant workers often face difficulties
in accessing the benefits, including language
barriers, fear of repatriation, fear of employer
reprisal and/or lack of system awareness
(Braganza 2016).
SAWP workers are also eligible for other social
security benefits. Separate social security
agreements have also been concluded, including
between Canada and the United Mexican States
(van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017).

127

Additional information is available
agricultural/seasonal-agricultural.html.

https://www.canada.ca/en/employment-social-development/services/foreign-workers/

128

The TFWP is a broader programme that allows national employers to hire temporary foreign workers in a range of fields for varying time
periods.

129

Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Dominica, Grenada, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines and Trinidad and Tobago.

157

158

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Table 6.2 SAWP workers’ access to healthcare and social security benefits
Coverage under the public scheme
Healthcare

Yes
•
During waiting periods (3 months in British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec),
private insurance provided by the employer 130

Employment injury benefits

Yes (provincial or territorial insurance plan)
•
If excluded from the provincial or territorial plan, private insurance provided by
the employer

Cash sickness and
unemployment benefits

No
•
Residence in Canada while receiving benefits is required

Maternity, parental and
compassionate care benefits

Yes
•
Upon completion of insurable hours

Long-term benefits (old-age,
disability and survivors’
benefits)

Yes, upon completion of the qualifying period
•
Portability of benefits and coordination of schemes ensured through bilateral
social security agreements

Source: Government of Canada (Employment and Social Development Canada and Service Canada)

► Adoption of unilateral measures by countries of
origin and destination.
An important option to consider is the
establishment of national SPFs in origin countries
to facilitate the extension of social protection to
the families of migrant workers abroad and to
returning migrants who are not covered or only
partially covered by a social security agreement
or by the legislation of their home countries.
Other measures may include exceptions to the
requirement that migrant workers join the social
insurance scheme of their country of employment
if they are already covered in their country of origin
and authorizing the payment of benefits abroad.
It is also essential to incorporate flexibility into
the design of social security schemes in order to
ensure that migrant seasonal agricultural workers
can also meet the qualifying conditions and
minimum requirements. For example, countries
can authorize retroactive payments for missed
contribution periods, the totalization of nonconsecutive contributory periods and lump-sum
payment or reimbursement of contributions
when leaving the scheme. This situation of
migrant seasonal agricultural workers requires
a compromise between providing effective
coverage of these workers and their families in the
host country and after their return, and requiring
them to pay contributions from which they cannot
benefit.

Examples:
► Under Ghana’s social security legislation, foreign
workers who leave the country before reaching
the minimum age to qualify for a pension
benefit may withdraw their contributions
(National Pensions Act, sect. 101).
► In France, seasonal migrant workers contribute
to and benefit from the social security system
on the same terms as nationals. The minimum
contribution period for unemployment benefits
is 24 weeks over a two-year period.
► Colombian nationals working abroad may
remain affiliated as independent workers
under the General Pension System.131 This is
particularly important for migrant seasonal
agricultural workers, allowing them to ensure
that their family members back home remain
protected.
► In Macedonia, the Social Protection Act regulates
the social assistance benefits to which nationals
and foreign nationals with a permanent
residence permit are entitled. Although the
residency requirement is usually difficult for
migrant seasonal agricultural workers to
meet, they are entitled to healthcare from the
moment that their employment commences.
If Macedonia has concluded a social security
agreement with the worker’s country of origin,

130

For more information, see: https://www.canada.ca/en/employment-social-development/services/foreign-workers/agricultural/
seasonal-agricultural/requirements.html. In some provinces (including British Columbia, New Brunswick, Ontario and Quebec), there is
a three-month waiting period for all new residents and employers must ensure that their seasonal workers have medical coverage for
those months.

131

Decree No. 682 on social protection mechanisms for nationals working abroad, 2014. Available at: https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/
natlex4.detail?p_lang=enandp_isn=96164andp_country=COLandp_count=590andp_classification=17andp_classcount=8.

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

pension periods from other countries may be
taken into consideration (Strban 2010).
► Complementary measures should be considered
in order to address the numerous administrative, practical and organizational obstacles
faced by migrant seasonal agricultural workers.
Information and services should take into account
their often-remote work location, long hours of
works, short stay in the country and other obstacles
as described above. Outreach programmes using
mobile units can facilitate access to information,
registration and payment of social security benefits
in remote rural areas. Other possibilities include
increasing the number of local offices in these
areas, facilitating social security access through
digital services and offering greater flexibility in
the choice of contact point for access to benefits
and services. In order to minimize the costs of
the latter, partnerships with established agencies,

organizations or private sector companies may
be sought. Experience has shown that such partnerships work well for simple processes, including
awareness-raising, the provision of information
and the payment of contributions, if the staff is
appropriately trained (ISSA 2012).
Seasonal work can be advantageous for all parties
concerned if migrant workers’ rights, including labour
rights, are enforced through effective regulation. More
jobs and higher wages allow migrants to support their
families at home through remittances while reducing
pressure on the labour market of their country of
origin. Migrant seasonal agricultural workers may
also fill significant labour and skills gaps in destination
countries, thereby promoting agricultural sector
growth and national development.

► Box 6.4 Costa Rica: Improving healthcare for indigenous migrant seasonal workers and
their families
Indigenous people are among the most vulnerable migrant workers as they are often excluded from social
protection and suffer from serious discrimination. However, some countries have taken decisive steps to
improve their situation. Costa Rica is a destination country for the Ngäbe-Buglé people, an indigenous
migrant community from Panama whose members travel to Costa Rica to perform seasonal work on coffee
farms. Their access to social services has historically been limited owing to their high mobility and separation
from the resident population.
Cross-border migration of Ngäbe-Buglé migrant workers and their families has been addressed in Costa
Rica through several policies and programmes that focus primarily on healthcare. The Healthy Farms (Finca
Sana) project was funded by the World Bank and implemented by the IOM in cooperation with the Governments of Costa Rica and Panama, health authorities and health partners, civil society, coffee producers and
the Ngäbe-Buglé people between 2007 and 2009. It sought to improve the health of these migrant workers
through public- private partnerships and a participatory approach to the coverage of medical emergencies
and occupational, maternal and child health in decentralized communities. As part of the project, a
visiting mobile health team provided health education and medical assistance, check-ups and care during
emergencies to 3,000 Ngäbe-Buglé people. Additional services included the establishment of community
homes, health networks and emergency transportation systems and the provision of logistical support for
health promoters along migration routes.132
The bilateral agreements and other policy instruments on labour migration concluded between Costa
Rica and Panama since 2005 include references to social security, and particularly access to healthcare, for
indigenous populations in Costa Rica. The 2015 bilateral agreement seeks, among other things, to ensure
access to healthcare, education and social security. Regulation 8986 of 30 August 2018 entitles national
and non-national coffee-pickers, including indigenous migrant workers such as the Ngäbe-Buglé people,
regardless of migration status, to coverage under the social security system and to healthcare in hospitals
and clinics associated with the Costa Rican Social Security Fund during the five-month harvest period. A
family benefit, funded jointly by the Costa Rican Coffee Institute (ICAFE) and the Government (contributing
5.75 per cent and 9.25 per cent, respectively), is also provided but pension benefits are not included.
Source: IOM 2015

132

Although this project is an interesting initiative, in order to ensure its sustainability it is paramount to ensure equality of treatment
between nationals and non-nationals and to integrate migrant workers into the national health systems; the primary responsibility for
doing so ultimately lies with the State.

159

160

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

►6.3 Migrant workers in an
irregular situation
Migrant workers in an irregular situation are defined
by the International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their
Families (ICRMW) as those who are not “authorized
to enter, to stay and to engage in a remunerated
activity in the State of employment pursuant to the
law of that State and to international agreements to
which that State is a party” (Art. 5). As noted in the
Glossary, the Committee on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers has stated that “the
term ‘in an irregular situation’ or ‘non-documented’
is the proper terminology […;] use of the term ‘illegal’
to describe migrant workers in an irregular situation
is inappropriate and should be avoided as it tends to
stigmatize them by associating them with criminality”
(CMW 2013, para. 4).
There are different paths towards irregularity and
migrant workers may find themselves in an irregular
situation for a variety of reasons: their visas may have
expired, their asylum applications may have been
declined or they may have entered the country without
documents or with forged documents. They may
also have entered the country of destination through
regular channels and obtained a valid residence permit
but find themselves in an irregular situation because
they have engaged in illegal employment.
In a number of countries, migrant workers in an
irregular situation are excluded from coverage under
the labour and social security legislation and thus
do not have access to social protection, including
healthcare. Providing these workers and their families
with access to emergency and other healthcare has
many advantages; it improves their health status,
reduces their vulnerability and social exclusion,
enhances their resilience and employability, represents
a first step towards regularization of their status, and
benefits society as a whole by reducing public health
risks (including the transmission of communicable
diseases) and lowering the infant and child mortality
rates.

6.3.1 International legal provisions
on migrant workers in an irregular
situation
6.3.1.1 Human rights instruments
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights make no
distinction based on nationality or immigration status,
thus granting all migrants the right to social protection.
With regard to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), in its General
Comment No. 20, the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights states that “the Covenant rights
apply to everyone including non-nationals, such as
refugees, asylum-seekers, stateless persons, migrant
workers and victims of international trafficking,
regardless of legal status and documentation” (CESCR
2009, para 30). Similarly, the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination has called upon
States parties to the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
to “ensure that legislative guarantees against racial
discrimination apply to non-citizens regardless of their
immigration status, and that the implementation of
legislation does not have a discriminatory effect on
non-citizens” (CERD 2004, para. 7).
In its General Recommendation No. 26 on Women
Migrant Workers, the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women recalls that States
parties have an obligation to protect the basic human
rights of women migrant workers, regardless of their
immigration status. The Committee stresses that
women migrant workers in an irregular situation
must have access to legal remedies and justice with a
view to fulfilling their basic needs, including in times
of health emergencies or pregnancy and maternity,
(para. 2(l)) and that victims of abuse must be provided
with emergency and social services, regardless of their
immigration status (CEDAW 2008, para. 26(i)).

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

A different approach is taken by the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which
provides that any difference of treatment between
nationals and non-nationals, including migrants with
irregular status, must be based on reasonable and
objective criteria.
As mentioned above, the International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of their Families (ICRMW) draws a distinction
between migrant workers in a regular and those in an
irregular situation. While Part III (on human rights)
applies to all migrant workers, regardless of their
administrative situation, Part IV sets out additional
rights for documented migrant workers including
liberty of movement and freedom to choose their
residence and to participate in public affairs.
The Convention states that all migrant workers,
whether in a regular or an irregular situation, have the
right to leave any State, including their State of origin,
and to enter and remain in their State of origin (Art. 8).
It establishes the right to life (Art. 9) and the principle
of equality before the courts (Art. 18) and prohibits
torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and
punishment (Art. 10), slavery and forced labour (Art.
11).
Article 27 states that “migrant workers and members
of their families shall enjoy in the State of employment
the same treatment granted to nationals in so far
as they fulfil the requirements provided for by the
applicable legislation of that State and the applicable
bilateral and multilateral treaties” and that “[w]here the
applicable legislation does not allow migrant workers
and members of their families a benefit, the States
concerned shall examine the possibility of reimbursing
interested persons the amount of contributions made
by them with respect to that benefit on the basis of
the treatment granted to nationals who are in similar
circumstances”.

133

In its General Comment No. 2 (CMW 2013), the
Committee on the Protection of the Rights of all
Migrant Workers and Members of their Families recalls
that “any distinction based on nationality or migration
status must be prescribed by law, pursue a legitimate
aim under the Convention, be necessary in the specific
circumstances, and be proportionate to the legitimate
aim pursued” (para. 18). It also considers that “[i]
n cases of extreme poverty and vulnerability, States
parties should provide emergency social assistance to
migrant workers in an irregular situation and members
of their families […] for as long as they might require it”
(para. 71) and that particular attention should be given
to women migrant domestic workers in an irregular
situation (para. 21).
With respect to access to healthcare, States are
obliged to ensure migrant workers’ effective access to
any medical care that is urgently required in order to
avoid irreparable harm to their health (para. 72) and
may not require public health institutions to share
data on a patient’s migration status with immigration
authorities (para. 74).
Nevertheless, as mentioned above, the limited
number of ratifications of this Convention, especially
by countries of destination, limits effective recognition
of the rights established therein.

6.3.1.2 Scope of application of ILO
Conventions
While most ILO social security Conventions establish
the principle of equality of treatment between
nationals and non-nationals (see Table 2.1), their scope
of application does not always extend to migrant
workers in an irregular situation (see table 6.3).133

The CEACR has held that the provisions of the Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97), the
Migration for Employment Recommendation (Revised), 1949 (No. 86) and Part II (Equality of Opportunity and Treatment)
of the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975 (No. 143) cover only migrant workers who have
been regularly admitted for the purposes of employment (ILO 1999).

161

162

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Table 6.3. ILO Conventions and Recommendations relevant to specific groups of migrant
workers.
Migrant
Domestic
Workers

Migrant
Seasonal
Agricultural
Workers

Migrants In
An Irregular
Situation

Refugees

C102 Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention, 1952

X

X

X

C118 Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention,
1962

X

X

X

R202 Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012

X

X

C157 Maintenance of Social Security Rights Convention, 1982

X

X

C97 Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949

X

X

X

R086 - Migration for Employment Recommendation
(Revised), 1949

X

X

X

C143 Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions)
Convention, 1975

X

X

X

C181 Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997

X

X

X

R151 Migrant Workers Recommendation, 1975

X

X

X

C189 The Domestic Workers Convention, 2011

X

R204 Transition from the Informal to the Formal Economy
Recommendation, 2015

X

C184 Convention on Safety and Health in Agriculture, 2001
C168 Convention on Employment Promotion and Protection
against Unemployment, 1988

The Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions)
Convention, 1975 (No. 143) seeks to ensure that
migrant workers in an irregular situation who are or
have been engaged in unlawful employment are not
deprived of their rights in respect of the work that
they have performed. Under Part I of Convention
No. 143, migrant workers in an irregular situation
are entitled to the social security rights and benefits
which they have acquired by virtue of their period of
employment and, in the case of migrants in a regular
situation, by fulfilling the other qualifying conditions.
More specifically, Article 9(1) requires that migrant
workers whose situation cannot be regularized enjoy
equality of treatment in respect of rights arising out of
past employment, including as regards social security.
According to the CEACR, the scope of this provision
should be determined with respect to the relevant
national legislation applying to migrants with regular
status and the provision of equality of treatment. Thus,
migrant workers in an irregular situation are entitled to

X

X (children)

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

a specific right only where that right is granted to lawfully
employed migrant workers under the legislation of the
country of destination. Furthermore, Article 9(1) does
not extend to benefits, the granting of which is not
dependent on periods of past employment, and the
provision should be understood to refer to long-term
benefits. The term “past employment” includes “any
period of legal employment in the country concerned
which may have preceded the illegal employment”
(ILO 1999, para. 308, and ILO 2016d).
However, although the equality of treatment to be
accorded to migrant workers in an irregular situation
pursuant to Convention No. 143 is considered to be on
the basis of equality with migrant workers in a regular
situation in the territory, the effect in practice may be
equality with nationals where the country concerned
grants such treatment to migrant workers in a regular
situation.

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

Further, the CEACR considered that “as provided for
in Paragraph 34(1)(b) of Recommendation No. 151,
it is essential that all migrant workers, irrespective
of their legal status, whether regular or irregular, be
entitled to benefits due in respect of any employment
injury suffered” (ILO 2016d, para. 314). Therefore the
provisions of Convention No. 143 should be read in
conjunction with paragraph 34 of the Migrant Workers
Recommendation (No. 151), which states that “[a]
migrant worker who leaves the country of employment
should be entitled, irrespective of the legality of his stay
therein […] to benefits which may be due in respect of
any employment injury suffered” (para. 34(1)(b)).134 A
number of States have in fact granted these benefits
to workers regardless of their migratory situation and
of whether they and/or their employers have made
contributions to the social security system (ILO 2016d).

6.3.1.3 Children

With regard to the Social Security (Minimum Standards)
Convention, 1952 (No. 102), the Committee has
stated that the concept of residence for the purpose
of the Convention only applies to lawfully residing
non-nationals. “The Committee recognizes that
extending the right to social security, including the right
to medical care, to non-citizens is a key challenge for
many societies today. With regard to the non-citizens,
even where they are in an irregular status on the
territory of another State, such as undocumented
workers, they should have access to basic benefits and
particularly to emergency medical care” (ILO 2011,
para. 260).

6.3.2 Obstacles, protection gaps and
challenges

On several occasions, the Committee on the Rights
of the Child has expressed the view that children in
an irregular situation or whose parents lack regular
migration status should enjoy equal access to social
protection, including health services, psychological
care and disability care (CRC 2002(a), (b) and (c);
CRC 2003). The importance of full access to social
protection for children, regardless of their legal
status, is also affirmed in the Social Protection Floors
Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202), according to
which States “should provide the basic social security
guarantees referred to in this Recommendation to at
least all residents and all children, as defined in national
laws and regulations”(Art. 6), whether or not they are
legal residents.

In many countries, migrants in an irregular situation
live in constant fear of detention or deportation and
may even face criminal persecution on the grounds of
their administrative status alone. They are frequently
excluded from the social protection system, even
where they have lived and worked in the country for
many years.

► Box 6.5 Basic social security guarantees for all residents and children (Recommendation No.
202, para. 6): Observations of the CEACR in the 2019 General Survey concerning the Social
Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202)
In its 2019 General Survey, the CEACR states: “Equal treatment in coverage and access to social security
should be guaranteed to all members of society, who should stand together, non-nationals and nationals,
to provide this protection as an expression of solidarity. The Committee reiterates that non-discrimination
is a key principle on which the right to social security is premised. It pertains to all persons, irrespective of
status and origin” (para. 142).
The Committee then calls on member States “to establish the principle of equality of treatment to ensure
that non-national residents, irrespective of their immigration status, have the same social security rights as
nationals. […] The Committee also hopes that member States will make efforts to provide non-nationals,
even those in an irregular status, including workers in an irregular situation, with access to basic benefits,
and particularly to any medical care that is urgently required” (para. 143).

134

Paragraph 34(1)(c)(ii) of the Recommendation also provides specifically that migrant workers, irrespective of their legal status, should be
entitled “to reimbursement of any social security contributions which have not given and will not give rise to rights under national laws
or regulations or international arrangements: Provided that where social security contributions do not permit entitlement to benefits,
every effort should be made with a view to the conclusion of bilateral or multilateral agreements to protect the rights of migrants”.

163

164

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Migrant workers in an irregular situation are
particularly vulnerable to hazardous conditions of
work, abuse and exploitation, circumstances that
worsen during crises.

► Non-contributory social protection programmes, including social assistance schemes,
are usually based on residence, thus excluding
migrants in an irregular situation.

► Migrants affected by disasters often fall between the cracks of response systems, reducing
their ability to seek adequate support. This is especially true of migrant workers in an irregular
situation and their families. In the absence of
such support, they are exposed to further risks
such as increased abuse, smuggling, trafficking
and other forms of exploitation.

► Migrant workers with irregular status in the
informal economy may not be able to meet the
application criteria for a permanent or longterm residence permit even after living and
working in a country for several years.

► This increase in vulnerability has recently been
evidenced during the COVID-19 pandemic;
migrant workers in an irregular situation have
been one of the hardest hit communities.
Because of their status, the authorities may not
be aware of their existence or may not consider
them when developing public assistance
measures such as prevention, testing and
vaccination
campaigns.135
State-imposed
mobility restrictions and border closures have
redirected migrants into situations where
humanitarian support is often not available
(Sanchez and Achilli 2020). As a consequence,
the paths for safe, orderly and regular migration
have narrowed, compounding the risks and
challenges that migrants with irregular status
face.
► Poor housing, inadequate access to water and
sanitation, risky and exploitative employment
and the circumstances of travel to the country of
destination can have a significant impact these
migrants’ health status and endanger their lives.
► Despite these enhanced vulnerabilities and
health risks, migrant workers in an irregular
situation usually enjoy little or no access to
health services and are often disregarded in
policy conversations despite their high level of
vulnerability (OHCHR 2014, UNDP 2009).
► Eligibility requirements related to employment
and residence often exclude migrant workers with
irregular status from access to social security.
► Because most contributory social security
benefits are linked to employment, migrants
who work in the informal economy are excluded
from social security on the basis not of their
residence status, but of the labour laws.

135

For further information, see ILO Forthcoming 2021.

► Lack of documentation (such as identification
documents, passport, birth certificate, work
contract, pay slips and bank statements) is an additional obstacle to accessing benefits. For example,
migrant workers in the informal economy,
regardless of status, may be unable to prove
their source of income and produce the documents required for means-tested social assistance
schemes.
► The risk and fear of deportation is another major
obstacle that prevents migrant workers in an
irregular situation from claiming their benefits
and exercising their right to healthcare and other
services. Even in countries with legislation that
grants them basic access to healthcare, they may
still be reported to the authorities and face deportation (PICUM 2007).
► Owing to their status and their often-temporary
and unpredictable length of stay, migrant workers
in an irregular situation may face additional
challenges if they attempt to claim their social
protection rights or request legal assistance.
For many migrant workers with irregular status, work in
the informal economy is the only way to make a living.
In some countries, the informal economy accounts for
up to three quarters of all non-agricultural employment
and is often characterized by poor employment
conditions and poverty (ILO 2012b). However, the
informal economy is not composed entirely of migrant
workers with irregular status; it also includes many
nationals, documented migrants and foreign nationals
with a residence status that does not allow them to
work, such as asylum seekers and, in some countries,
refugees. These workers may have similar problems in
accessing social protection.

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

6.3.3 From right to reality: Extending
social protection to migrant workers in
an irregular situation

migrants in an irregular situation originating
from the MERCOSUR and associated countries.
At the time, 90 per cent of migrants in an
irregular situation were from MERCOSUR
countries (Cavaleri 2012). Not only did the
programme guarantee their right to migrate
in and out of these countries; it also entitled
them to reside, work and study there. At the
outset, the programme granted a temporary
two-year residence permit, which could then
be converted into a permanent permit upon
presentation of an identity document and a
criminal record certificate.

A variety of measures can be taken in order to ensure
the social protection of migrant workers in an irregular
situation:
► Adoption of unilateral measures, including
national SPFs. Countries of destination can facilitate the regularization of these migrant workers
through measures ranging from the simplification of administrative procedures and reduction
of legal loopholes to widespread regularization
campaigns. This approach can have a positive
financial impact; in Spain, “significantly higher
public revenues resulted from regularization,
even where social security benefits were already
granted to migrant workers in an irregular status;
positive labour market impact was reported in
association with mobility of migrant workers from
areas of high immigrant populations to low immigrant population localities” (Monras, VásquezGrenno and Elias 2018).

In its first phase (2006–2010), the programme
granted residency to 13,000 non-MERCOSUR
migrants and facilitated the regularization of
650,000 (Cavaleri 2012).136 Overall, 11.6 per
cent of the migrant population have benefitted
from some social plan since 2005; 51 per cent
of migrant families have had access to family
benefits137 and 75 per cent of migrant men (over
65 years of age) and 60 per cent of migrant
women (over 60 years of age) have received
a pension (ILO 2015c). Taken together, these
measures have reduced unemployment,
underemployment and (extreme) poverty
(Cavaleri 2012).

Examples:
► In 2002, Argentina established a Regional
Agreement for Nationals of Member States
of the Common Market of the South, which
allowed nationals of any of the six MERCOSUR
Member States to reside and work in each
other’s territory under the principle of equality
of treatment. In 2003, the Government
commenced the signing and implementation
of all international human rights treaties,
leading to a shift in its domestic and foreign
policy and a new rights-based approach. A
year later, it eliminated the deportation of
migrants in an irregular situation originating
from neighbouring countries and signed a new
migration law (Act No. 25871/2004), which not
only recognized migration as a human right but
also eased regularization procedures, provided
for equality of treatment and guaranteed
family reunification and migrants’ access
to social assistance, health and education,
irrespective of migration status. In 2005, the
country implemented the Great Country (Patria
Grande) programme, which gave effect to the
Migration Act (Act No. 25871/2004) and was
designed to promote the regularization of

Argentina has also launched a national labour
formalization plan through Act No. 25877/2004,
which seeks to ensure respect for the labour
laws and access to social security and to promote
formalization. The plan focuses on occupations
with a very low formalization rate, in which
migrant workers are often overrepresented.
Act No. 26844/2013 on domestic work facilitates
the regularization of domestic workers by
establishing a simplified register for domestic
workers and a personal card in order to facilitate
the payment of contributions and access to
rights; it also establishes general rules on
occupational safety and health and maximum
working hours. In addition to these instruments,
the Government has established a National
Institute against Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Racism and a Tripartite Commission on
Gender and Labour Equality.
► Countries can unilaterally extend social protection
to migrant workers in an irregular situation
through the development of inclusive policies,
laws and schemes.

136

A total of 58 per cent of applicants to the programme were from Paraguay, followed by Bolivia (24 per cent) and Peru (11 per cent).

137

This estimate includes both contributory and non-contributory schemes.

165

166

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Examples:
► Under Panama’s social security legislation (Act
No. 51 of 27 December 2005), foreign workers
who do not comply with the migration rules or
the rules on the employment of foreign nationals
may register with the Social Security Fund (Caja
de Seguro Social) despite their irregular status.
Thus, migrants in an irregular situation can
access the social security system under the same
conditions as other workers.
► In Switzerland, migrant workers in an irregular
situation may, under certain conditions, enjoy
various social security benefits; coverage is not
contingent on legal status but arises from the
obligation to enrol in a social insurance scheme
(ILO 2016c);
► In Cyprus, labour inspectors who encounter
unregistered or irregularly employed workers
require the employer to register them with the
Social Insurance Scheme, which covers every
gainfully employed person in Cyprus.
► Employment injury for migrant workers in an
irregular situation
► In Japan and the Republic of Korea, the Labour
Standards Act (Act No. 49 (1947), Chapter VIII)
and the Industrial Accident Compensation
Insurance Act (1963), as amended, sects 5(2)
and 6, respectively, provide that all workers
are eligible to receive industrial accident
compensation, regardless of their legal status.
► In the United States, migrants in an irregular
situation have received compensation of up to
US$2.85 million for injuries owing to an unsafe
environment.
► In South Africa, migrant workers are expressly
included under the Compensation for Injury and
Occupational Diseases Act (Act No. 130 (1993), as
amended, regardless of their migratory status.
► Health protection for migrant workers in an
irregular situation is regulated at the national level
and, depending on the country, may include full
access once the qualifying conditions have been
met, access only to emergency care, or no access
at all. Migrants in an irregular situation had no
access to preventive care in over 60 per cent of the
developed countries sampled in a UNDP study and
had no access to emergency care in 35 per cent

138

For details and country examples, see Chapter 5, section 5.2.1.4.

of those countries. In developing countries, those
figures were 70 and 30 per cent, respectively (UNDP
2009). Hence, entitlement to healthcare under
national legislation is often at odds with migrants
with irregular status’ rights under international
human rights instruments. The extent of coverage
varies widely from one country to another.138
Examples:
► In France, migrant workers in an irregular
situation who have been living in France for at
least 3 months without interruption and whose
financial resources are below a certain threshold
may be eligible for State medical assistance (Aide
Médicale d’Etat (AME)) covering up to 100 per
cent of their healthcare expenses (France 2019).
► In Belgium, article 57(2) of the Organization Act
of 8 July 1976 entitles migrants in an irregular
situation to urgent medical care if they reside
in an area covered by a public social assistance
centre and/or do not have the financial means
to pay for their own medical care. An urgent
medical care certificate from a doctor is required.
► In Germany, migrant workers in an irregular
situation have access to emergency medical care
and can request reimbursement of costs without
fear of denouncement or deportation since the
procedure is confidential (OHCHR 2014).
► In Sweden, the Act on health and medical
care for persons staying in Sweden without
necessary permits (Act No. 2013:407) entitles
non-documented workers to healthcare.
► Mexico’s 2014 Migration Act (sect. 8) and
Uruguay’s 2007 Migration Act (Act No. 18.250,
sect. 9) guarantee access to healthcare for all
persons within their territory, irrespective of
migration status (ILO 2016c);

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

► Box 6.6 Portugal’s Strategic Plan for Migration: Access to healthcare for all people,
including migrant workers in an irregular situation
In 2015, after public consultation, the Portuguese Government launched the National Strategic Plan for
Migration 2015–2020. The Plan, which is consistent with the European Commission’s Global Approach to
Migration and Mobility, is designed to facilitate the social and economic integration of migrants in the
country. It is also in line with the Portuguese Constitution, article 64 of which guarantees access to general
healthcare under the National Health System (NHS) for all residents, including immigrants; the NHS cannot
deny assistance based on nationality, legal status or lack of economic resources. All residents must pay a
small fee in order to access healthcare. Persons who have no residence permit or are in an irregular situation
under the immigration legislation are, however, required to present a document from the community in
which they live, certifying that they have been living in the country for more than 90 days.
► Migrants in an irregular situation who cannot prove residence in Portugal for more than 90 days are
nevertheless eligible for certain types of care through the NHS at no cost:
► urgent and vital healthcare;
► maternal, reproductive and child healthcare;
► treatment of communicable diseases that pose a threat to public health (such as HIV/AIDS or tuberculosis);
► immunization.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Portugal adopted provisions that regularized migrants, including
asylum seekers with pending applications, until 30 June 2020. By treating them as permanent residents, it
granted them full citizenship rights, including access to public services such as healthcare, social support,
employment and housing (ILO 2020d).
► Conclusion and enforcement of bilateral/multilateral social security agreements or including
social security provisions in BLAs can facilitate
the regularization and formalisation of migrant
workers. Indeed, the mere existence of these
agreements can be an incentive for workers to
migrate through regular channels and work in the
formal economy in order to benefit from the social
protection that they provide.
► For instance, the 1979 Social Security Agreement
between Spain and Morocco, amended in 1998,
covers employed and self-employed workers,
including agricultural and domestic workers,
and provides for equality of treatment under
the legislation of the country of destination.
► Complementary measures at various levels may be
considered in order to address the administrative,
practical and organizational obstacles faced by
migrants in an irregular situation.
► Dialogue and cooperation between countries of
origin and destination can help to improve the
protection of migrant workers by facilitating the

139

regulation of labour migration and recruitment
processes. For example, the Colombo Process
is a regional consultative process aiming
at managing overseas employment and
contractual labour migration through informal
and non-binding dialogue and cooperation.
Under this process, which accounts for a high
percentage of Asian migration flows, member
countries have taken concrete steps aiming
at improving labour migration management,
including the conclusion of BLAs and MoUs
and the launching of programmes aiming at
regulating the recruitment process in order
to discourage irregular migration. Efforts to
disseminate information on the migration
process and reduce irregular migration have
been made through orientation programmes
and training opportunities in countries of origin.
Similarly, debates held in the context of the
Global Forum on Migration and Development
and the Abu Dhabi Dialogue139 have focused
on a comprehensive approach to the labour
recruitment industry in order to empower
temporary and circular migrants.

The Global Forum on Migration and Development is a voluntary, informal and non-binding process, open to all UN Member States and
Observers, which seeks to enhance cooperation in the areas of migration and development. The Abu Dhabi Dialogue is an interregional
ministerial consultation process that was established in 2008 in order to bring together member countries of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and the Colombo Process, as well as Malaysia, Singapore and Yemen.

167

168

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Non-binding regional policy documents
and frameworks can also demonstrate a
region’s commitment to the social protection
of migrant workers, including those in an
irregular situation, and guide policy action at
the national level. The Code on Social Security in
the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) (2007) states that “[i]llegal residents and
migrants in an irregular situation should be
provided with basic minimum protection and
should enjoy coverage according to the laws
of the host country” (Art. 17(3)). However, the
Code is not a legally binding agreement and
most of the SADC countries do not, in practice,
ensure access to social protection for workers in
an irregular situation.
► At the national level, it is important to ensure
the consistency of migration, employment and
social protection policies. For instance, policies
and measures aimed at facilitating the transition
from the informal to the formal economy can
have an impact on migrants with irregular
status’ access to the formal labour market
and employment- based social protection
and can thus facilitate their regularization..
Formalization can be achieved through a
variety of means, including by extending
mandatory social insurance coverage, perhaps
with partial subsidies for low-income groups,
and enhancing access to non-contributory and
usually tax-financed benefits.
► Countries of origin can strengthen the control
and monitoring of recruitment agencies to
ensure that employers of migrant workers
provide them with a contract and decent
working conditions, including social protection.
In many countries, factors such as lack of
monitoring and investigation mechanisms,
unscrupulous intermediaries and fraudulent
agencies expose migrant workers to, among
other things, recruitment fees that push them
into irregularity, indebtedness, forced labour
and trafficking. This is especially true of migrant
domestic workers (ILO 2016a).

►6.4 Conclusion
While many instruments and standards establish the
social security rights of migrant workers, States should
introduce provisions that specifically provide social
security coverage to those who are not yet covered in
accordance with the principles of equality of treatment
and non-discrimination. Migrant workers’ access to
social protection depends on a variety of factors, some
of which are linked to their employment status, skills
set and duration of stay and others to the lack of social
security agreements, discriminatory laws and complex
administrative procedures. Migrant domestic and
seasonal agricultural workers and migrant workers in
an irregular situation face specific barriers that must
be taken into account in order to ensure universal
social protection.
In order to extend social protection to migrant domestic
workers, States must ensure that all domestic workers
are covered under their labour and social security laws,
simplify procedures for registration and the payment
of contributions and adapt their eligibility criteria in
light of the specific situation of these workers (work in
a private household, multiple employers and so on).
For migrant seasonal agricultural workers, special
measures that meet their needs in light of the
temporary and unpredictable nature of their migration
are required; these may include allowing them to
retain membership in the social security schemes of
their country of origin, insuring the portability of their
benefits and authorizing lump-sum reimbursement
of their contributions. It is also important to address
practical obstacles such as isolation, high labour
mobility, lack of information and networks and low,
fluctuating income.
For migrant workers in an irregular situation, national
measures that provide access to basic social protection
without fear of repercussions should be adopted or
enhanced. These workers are often non-documented
and face hazardous working conditions, poor housing,
abuse and exploitation. This forces them to work in
the informal economy and severely affects their health
status and endangers their lives.
While such customized measures are important when
extending social protection to these three categories of
migrant workers, many other groups may be left out if
their specific characteristics are not taken into account.
For example, seafarers, posted and detached workers,
frontier workers, health workers and internal migrant
workers warrant greater attention and could be the
subject of additional research.

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

► Bibliography
Amnesty International. 2012. Exploited Labour Migrant Workers in Italy’s Agricultural Sector. London.
Anderson, Joseph Trawicki. 2020. “Managing Labour Migration in Malaysia: Foreign workers and
the challenges of ‘control’ beyond liberal democracies”. Third World Quarterly 42 (1): 86–104.
Braganza, Chantal. 2016. “What You Need to Know to Understand Migrant Labour in Canada”. Ontario:TVOntario. https://www.tvo.org/article/what-you-need-to-know-to-understand-migrantlabour-in-canada.
Brickenstein, Christine. 2015a. “Impact Assessment of Seasonal Labor Migration in Australia and
New Zealand: A Win-Win Situation?” Asian and Pacific Migration Journal 24 (1): 107-129.
–––. 2015b. “Social Protection of Foreign Seasonal Workers: From State to Best Practice”.
Comparative Migration Studies 3 (2). https://comparativemigrationstudies.springeropen.com/
track/pdf/10.1007/s40878-015-0004-9.pdf.
Bureau of European Policy Advisors. 2010. Opening Europe’s Doors to Unskilled and Low-skilled
Workers: A Practical Handbook. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
Canada, Canadian Agricultural Human Resource Council (CAHRC). 2017. “A Review of Canada’s
Seasonal Agriculture Worker Program”. Gloucester, Canada: CAHRC.
Canada, Government. 2020. “Contract for the employment in Canada of seasonal agricultural
workers from Mexico – 2020”. https://www.canada.ca/en/employment-social-development/
services/foreign-workers/agricultural/seasonal-agricultural/apply/mexico.html.
Cavaleri, Paulo. 2012. “Argentina: Resettling Refugees within the Context of an Open Migration
Policy.” Forced Migration Review, 40:48–49.
CEDAW (UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women). 2008. General
Recommendation No. 26 on Women Migrant Workers.
CERD (UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination). 2004. General Recommendation
No. 30, Discrimination against Non-citizens.
CESCR (UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights). 2009. General Comment No. 20:
Non-discrimination in Economic, Social and Cultural rights.
CMW (UN Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
their Families). 2013. General Comment No. 2 on the Rights of Migrant Workers in an Irregular
Situation and Members of their Families.
COE (Council of Europe). 2007. Recommendation 1781 (2007) on Agriculture and Illegal Employment
in Europe.
Corrado, Alessandra. 2017. Migrant Crop Pickers in Italy and Spain. Berlin, Germany: Heinrich Böll
Foundation.
Council of the European Union. 2014. “Council Adopts Directive on Third-country Seasonal Workers”,
17 February 2014. https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/28959/141044.pdf.
CRC (UN Committee on the Rights of the Child). 2002a. Concluding Observations: Antilles.
–––. 2002b. Concluding Observations: Greece.
–––. 2002c. Concluding Observations: Netherlands.
–––. 2003. Concluding Observations: Korea.

169

170

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

D’Andrea, Anna Maria. 2021. “Colf e Badanti: stipendio minimo 2020, cosa prevede il CCNL
lavoro domestico”. https://www.money.it/colf-badanti-stipendio-minimo-2018-ccnl-lavorodomestico.
EU (European Union). 2013. How Many People Work in Agriculture in the European Union? An Answer
Based on Eurostat Data Sources. European Agricultural Economics Briefs.
–––. 2014. Directive 2014/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014
on the conditions of entry and stay of third-country nationals for the purpose of employment
as seasonal workers.
FAO-ILO-IUF (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (ILO), ILO and International
Union of Food, Agricultural, Hotel, Restaurant, Catering, Tobacco and Allied Workers’
Associations (IUF)). 2005. Agricultural Workers and their Contribution to Sustainable Agriculture
and Rural Development. FAO, ILO and IUF.
France, Ministry of Solidarity and Health. 2019. “Are You an Undocumented Immigrant?” https://
www.complementaire-sante-solidaire.gouv.fr/undocumented-immigrant.php.
Fudge, Judy and Claire Hobden. 2018. Conceptualizing the Role of Intermediaries in Formalizing
Domestic Work. ILO.
Hirose Kenichi, Miloš Nikač and Edward Tamagno, 2011. Social Security for Migrant Workers: A rightsbased approach. Geneva: ILO.
Holzmann, Robert and Yann Pouget. 2010. Social Protection for Temporary Migrant Workers: Conceptual
Framework, Country Inventory, Assessment and Guidance: A Study prepared for the Global Forum
of Migration and Development. World Bank and Marseille Center for Mediterranean Integration.
Hu, Yu-Wei and Fiona Stewart. 2009. Pension Coverage and Informal Sector Workers: International
Experiences. OECD.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 1991. Migrant Workers.
–––. 1993. Resolution concerning the International Classification of Status in Employment (ICSE).
Fifteenth International Conference of Labour Statisticians.
–––. 1999. General Survey on the Reports on the Migration for Employment Convention (Revised) (No.
97), and Recommendation (Revised) (No. 86), 1949, and the Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention (No. 143), and Recommendation (No. 151), 1975. ILC.87/III(1B).
–––. 2002. Resolution concerning decent work and the informal economy. International Labour
Conference. 90th Session.
–––. 2004. Statistical Definition of Informal Employment: Guidelines Endorsed by the Seventeenth
International Conference of Labour Statisticians. Geneva: ILO.
–––. 2006. ILO Multilateral Framework on Labour Migration: Non-binding Principles and Guidelines for
a Rights-based Approach to Labour Migration.
–––. 2011. General Survey Concerning Social Security Instruments in Light of the 2008 Declaration on
Social Justice for a Fair Globalization. ILC.100/III(1B).
–––. 2012a. Social Security for All. Building Social Protection Floors and Comprehensive Social Security
Systems.
–––. 2012b. Statistical Update on Employment in the Informal Economy.
–––. 2013a. Domestic Workers Across the World: Global and Regional Statistics and the Extent of Legal
Protection.

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

–––. 2013b. Social Protection for Low-Skilled Migrant Workers and their Families. https://www.ilo.org/
dyn/migpractice/docs/137/PB7.pdf.
–––. 2014. Transitioning from the Informal to the Formal Economy.
–––. 2015a. ILO Global Estimates on Migrant Workers: Results and Methodology. Special Focus on Migrant
Domestic Workers.
–––. 2015b. Establishing Migrant Welfare Funds in Cambodia, Lao PDR and Myanmar.
–––. 2015c. Migraciones laborales en Argentina: protección social, informalidad y heterogeneidades
sectoriales.
–––. 2016a. Social Protection for Domestic Workers: Key Policy Trends and Statistics.
–––. 2016a. Regulating International Labour Recruitment in the Domestic Work Sector: A Review of Key
Issues, Challenges and Opportunities.
–––. 2016b. Expanding Social Security Coverage to Migrant Domestic Workers. http://www.oit.
org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---migrant/documents/briefingnote/
wcms_467719.pdf.
–––. 2016c. General Survey Concerning the Migrant Workers Instruments: Report of the Committee
of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations (arts 19, 22 and 35 of the
Constitution). ILC.105/III(1B).
–––. 2017. World Social Protection Report 2017–19: Universal Social Protection to Achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
–––. 2019a. “Extending Social Security to Domestic Workers: Lessons from International Experience.”
https://www.social-protection.org/gimi/gess/RessourcePDF.action?id=55723.
–––. 2019b. Extending Social Security Coverage to Workers in the Informal Economy: Lessons from
International Experience
–––. 2020a. Seasonal Migrant Workers’ Schemes: Rethinking Fundamental Principles and Mechanisms in
Light of COVID-19.
–––. 2020b. ILOSTAT database. https://ilostat.ilo.org/. Accessed 20 June 2020.
–––. 2020c. “Social Protection: Building social protection floors and comprehensive social security
systems”. http://www.social-protection.org.
–––. 2020d. “Social Protection for Migrant Workers: A Necessary Response to the COVID-19
Crisis”. https://www.ilo.org/secsoc/information-resources/publications-and-tools/Brochures/
WCMS_748979/lang--en/index.htm.
–––. 2021a. “Extending Social Security Coverage to Workers in the Informal Economy: Lessons from
International Experience (Good Practice Guide)”. https://www.social-protection.org/gimi/
RessourcePDF.action?id=55728.
–––. 2021b. “Extending Social Security Coverage to Workers in the Informal Economy: Lessons
from International Experience (Policy Resource Package)”. https://informaleconomy.socialprotection.org.
–––. 2021c. “Making Decent Work a Reality for Domestic Workers: Progress and Prospects Ten Years
after the Adoption of the Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189)”. https://www.ilo.org/
wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_802551.
pdf

171

172

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

–––. 2021d. ILO Global Estimates on International Migrant Workers - Results and Methodology Third edition.
–––. n.d. “Defining and Measuring Informal Employment”. https://www.ilo.org/public/english/
bureau/stat/download/papers/meas.pdf.
–––. Forthcoming. Brief on Access to Healthcare for Undocumented Migrants.
ILO–ITC (International Labour Organization – International Training Centre). n.d. “Labour inspection
in Domestic Work: Module 16”. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/--protrav/---travail/documents/publication/wcms_308907.pdf.
IOM (International Organization for Migration). 2015. “Costa Rica, Panama Sign Ground-breaking
Agreement to Protect Rights of Migrants”. https://www.iom.int/news/costa-rica-panama-signground-breaking-agreement-protect-rights-migrants.
Irregular Migration. 2020. “Irregular Migration – Too Important to Let Pass into Oblivion”. http://
irregular-migration.net/.
Koettl, Johannes. 2006. “The Relative Merits of Skilled and Unskilled Migration, Temporary and
Permanent Labor Migration and Portability of Social Security Benefits”, SP Discussion Paper
No.0614. World Bank.
Kulke, Ursula. 2006. Filling the Gap of Social Security for Migrant Workers: ILO’s Strategy. Geneva: ILO.
Maddouri, Kamel. 2011. Protection sociale des travailleurs tunisiens migrants: examen critique des
dispositifs nationaux et internationaux. Florence, Italy: European University Institute.
Martin, Philip. 2006. “Managing Labor Migration: Temporary Worker Programmes for the 21st
Century”, paper presented at the International Symposium on International Migration and
Development, Turin, Italy, 28–30 June 2006. https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/
population/events/pdf/other/turin/P07_Martin.pdf.
Monras, Joan; Javier Vázquez-Grenno; and Ferran Elias. 2018. “Understanding the Effects of
Legalizing Undocumented Immigrants”. Washington, DC: Cato Institute.
North-South Institute. 2006. Migrant Workers in Canada: A Review of the Canadian Seasonal Agricultural
Workers Program. Sunrise, US.
OHCHR (Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights). 2014. The Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights of Migrants in an Irregular Situation.
PICUM (Platform for International Cooperation on Undocumented Migrants). 2007. Access to Health
Care for Undocumented Migrants in Europe. Brussels.
Portugal, Government, Presidency of the Council of Ministers. 2015. Strategic Plan for Migration
2015–2020. https://www.acm.gov.pt/documents/10181/222357/PEM_ACM_final.pdf/9ffb37997389-4820-83ba-6dcfe22c13fb.
Rannveig Mendoza, Dovelyn and Kathleen Newland. 2007. Circular Migration and Development:
Trends, Policy Routes and Ways Forward. Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute (MPI). https://
www.migrationpolicy.org/research/circular-migration-and-development-trends-policy-routesand-ways-forward.
Rannveig Mendoza, Dovelyn, Kathleen Newland and Aaron Terrazas. 2008. Learning by Doing:
Experiences of Circular Migration. Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute (MPI). https://www.
migrationpolicy.org/research/learning-doing-experiences-circular-migration.

Chapter 6
Extending social protection to specific groups of migrant workers

Ruhs, Martin. 2006. “The Potential of Temporary Migration Programmes in Future International
Migration Policy”. International Labour Review 145 (1–2).
–––. 2013. “Temporary Foreign Worker Programmes: Policies, Adverse Consequences, and the need
to Make Them Work”. Geneva: ILO. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/--protrav/---migrant/documents/publication/wcms_232367.pdf.
Ruhs, Martin and Philip Martin. 2008. “Numbers vs. Rights: Trade-Offs and Guest Worker Programs”.
International Migration Review 42(1).
Ruiz, Neil and Dovelyn Agunias Rannveig. 2008. Protecting Temporary Workers: Migrant Welfare Funds
from Developing Countries. World Bank.
SADC (Southern African Development Community). n.d. Code on Social Security in the SADC. https://
www.sadc.int/files/2513/5843/3198/Code_on_Social_Security_in_SADC.pdf.
Sanchez, Gabriella and Luigi Achilli. 2020. Stranded: The Impacts of COVID-19 on Irregular Migration
and Migrant Smuggling. Florence, Italy: Migration Policy Centre and European University
Institute.
UNRISD (United Nations Research Institute for Social Development) et al. 2015. “Social Protection
Human Rights: About the platform”. http://www.socialprotection-humanrights.org.
Strban, Grega. 2010. “Social Security of (Migrant) Seasonal Workers: Beneficiary Report Croatia”.
Council of Europe, European Commission.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2009. Human Development Report 2009:
Overcoming Barriers: Human Mobility and Development.
Van Panhuys, Clara, Samia Kazi-Aoul and Geneviève Binette. 2017. “Migrant Access to Social
Protection under Bilateral Labour Agreements: A Review of 120 Countries and Nine Bilateral
Arrangements”, Extension of Social Security (ESS) Paper Series No. 57. https://ideas.repec.
org/p/ilo/ilowps/994955792602676.html.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2014. Portugal: Assessing Health-system Capacity to Manage
Sudden Large Influxes of Migrants.

173

174

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

175

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and
asylum seekers

176

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Key messages
► Many international and regional human rights instruments, including the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the 1966 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) and the 1989
Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), establish the universal human right to social security and contain
specific provisions on refugees’ access to social security.140 Other related rights are enshrined in the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (hereafter referred to as the 1951 Convention).141
► Refugees, the majority of whom (85 per cent) are hosted by developing countries, face specific obstacles in
accessing social protection142 owing to their often-temporary legal status, unpredictable length of stay, limited
history of contributions, lack of social protection from their countries of origin and limited or no access to the
formal labour market. Where there is a massive influx of refugees, the resulting pressure on the available
socio-economic resources tends to create tensions with host communities.
► National social protection strategies and systems should take into account the specificities of refugees and
asylum seekers in order to ensure their access to social protection on an equal footing with nationals based on
the principles of equality of treatment and non-discrimination.
► Refugees’ access to contributory social protection schemes is intrinsically linked to their access to the labour
market. Moreover, access to the labour market and to social protection facilitates their inclusion in national
legal frameworks and integration into the community, promotes social justice, contributes to tax revenue,
enhances public health and reduces dependency.
► The integration of refugees into national social protection schemes, both contributory and non-contributory,
can provide sustainable, cost-effective solutions allowing them to move out of humanitarian assistance,
particularly in protracted situations. Strengthening social protection systems generally benefits both refugees
and host communities and reduces tensions between them.
► Where possible, ad hoc and short-term emergency cash and food transfers for refugees and asylum seekers
can be incorporated into social protection strategies and channelled through existing social protection systems.
► Including refugees and asylum seekers in national social protection responses, in line with international
human rights and labour standards, will play an important role in mitigating the effects of COVID-19 with a
view to a swifter recovery.

140

See, among other things, Art. 24 of the IESCR.

141

See Arts 11–12 of the ICESCR on an adequate standard of living and health and Art. 23 of the 1951 Convention on public relief: “The
Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their territory the same treatment with respect to public relief and
assistance as is accorded to their nationals”.

142

As explained above, the term “social protection” includes both contributory and non-contributory schemes and programmes.

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

►7.1 Introduction
In many parts of the world, instability, conflicts,
persecution, violence and other human rights
violations, as well as natural disasters and climate
change, have forced people to leave their countries
and seek protection for themselves and their families
elsewhere. The need for protection has most recently
been evidenced by the unexpected emergence of
the COVID-19 pandemic, which has forcibly displaced
people throughout the world. For example, in March
2020, the number of asylum applications to EU
countries was 43 per cent lower than in the preceding
month, largely as a result of border closures and restrictions. The number of registered refugees worldwide
has also fallen, suggesting that the true magnitude of
individuals seeking international protection during this
pandemic has been underrepresented (UNHCR 2019).
Yet, based on the registration data collected in 2020,
the UNHCR estimates that there are 82,4 million
forcibly displaced persons in the world, including
26.4 million refugees, 4.1 million asylum seekers and
48 million internally displaced persons (UNHCR 2020).
The proportion of women and girls in internationally
displaced population was estimated at 47 per cent. Just
five countries – Afghanistan, Myanmar, South Sudan,
Syria and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) – account
for 68 per cent of cross-border displacements (UNHCR
2020). In 2018, on average, 37,000 people per day were
forced to flee their homes (UNHCR 2018a).
Despite a growing trend towards the inclusion of
refugees and asylum seekers in national social
protection systems, they rarely enjoy the same rights
as nationals; in practice, equality of treatment is still
far from achieved in many countries around the world.
National legislation may restrict their access to one
or a few social security benefits and the level of these
benefits may be inadequate. However, experience has
shown that extending social protection to refugees
and asylum seekers increases their resilience and
reduces poverty, exclusion and vulnerability (UNHCR

143

2011a; UNHCR 2012b; ILO 2018; Canonge n.d.). It also
reduces inequalities and contributes to economic
growth in host communities by supporting household
income and domestic consumption, thus reducing
strain on host communities’ resources and labour
markets. Consequently, failure to incorporate refugees
and asylum seekers into national social protection
systems can be a missed opportunity for countries
since refugees’ length of stay outside their countries of
origin can last for decades, and may even be indefinite.
The UNHCR is mandated to provide international
protection to refugees and asylum seekers, including
by seeking durable solutions such as voluntary repatriation, local integration and, where appropriate,
resettlement as a means of sharing responsibility
based on international solidarity.143
► Voluntary repatriation of refugees to their countries of origin can be facilitated when the situation permits (where there is no longer a risk of
persecution).
► Local integration of refugees in an asylum/host
country includes is a more permanent solution,
yet this process may be hindered by administrative
and practical obstacles.
► Resettlement involves transferring refugees from
the State in which they originally sought protection
to a third State that has agreed to grant them
permanent residence status.
It is important to allow refugees to live their lives in
dignity without depending on national or international
aid over the long term.
In light of the foregoing, this chapter begins with an
overview of the international legal framework, the
various definitions of refugees and asylum seekers,
and their right to work and to social protection. The
obstacles, protection gaps and challenges to these
rights are outlined in section 3 and possible solutions
and examples of national best practices are highlighted
in section 4.

Where durable solutions cannot be pursued, complementary admission pathways can provide some protection to refugees. For more
details, see: https://www.unhcr.org/complementary-pathways.html.

177

178

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

►7.2 International legal
framework
7.2.1 Definitions under various
international instruments
Persons who are seeking international protection,
have applied for refugee status or a complementary
international protection status and have not yet
been formally recognized as refugees are considered
asylum seekers.144 As part of their internationally
recognized obligations, States are responsible for
deciding whether asylum seekers qualify as refugees
by determining whether their fear of persecution in
their countries of origin is well-founded.145
The 1951 Convention is the primary international
instrument of refugee law and is grounded in Article
14 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
recognizes “the right of persons to seek asylum from
persecution in other countries”. It was adopted in
order to protect European refugees in the aftermath
of World War II, but its geographic and temporal
scope was subsequently expanded through the 1967
Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees in light
of the increasing number of displacements globally.
As at October 2020, 146 states have ratified the 1951
Convention.146
The 1951 Convention and its Protocol define “refugee”
as a person who “owing to a well-founded fear of being
persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group or political
opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and
is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling, to avail
himself of the protection of that country; or who, not
having a nationality and being outside the country of
his former habitual residence as a result of such events,
is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return
to it”. Thus, under international law, individuals are
considered refugees as soon as they meet the relevant
criteria, whether or not they have been formally
recognized by the State in which they sought asylum

(or by the UNHCR). The Convention also identifies the
categories of persons who are not eligible for refugee
status (those who have committed war crimes, crimes
against humanity, serious non-political crimes or acts
contrary to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations).
States should grant refugees permanent residence
status pursuant to Article 34 of the 1951 Convention,
which requires countries to facilitate their integration
and naturalization. The Convention also defines
refugees’ obligations to the Government of their host
country and vice versa. In the latter case, great emphasis
is placed on the principle of non-refoulement (Art. 33),
which prohibits countries from forcibly returning or
expelling refugees and asylum seekers to a country
in which there is a risk that their lives or freedom
would be threatened (Lauterpacht and Bethlehem
2003). Additional obligations include ensuring “access
to the courts, to primary education, to work, and the
provision for documentation, including a refugee travel
document in passport form” (UNHCR 2020a, p. 3).
As a complement to international law, regional instruments in Africa and the Americas have introduced
broader refugee criteria. For instance, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Convention Governing
the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa
considers that the term “refugee” includes persons
who are compelled to leave their place of habitual
residence owing to “external aggression, occupation,
foreign domination or events seriously disturbing
public order in either part or the whole of [their] country
of origin or nationality” (Art. I(2)). In Latin America,
the 1984 Cartagena Declaration on Refugees includes
in the definition of refugees “persons who have fled
their country because their lives, safety or freedom
have been threatened by generalized violence, foreign
aggression, internal conflicts, massive violation of
human rights or other circumstances which have
seriously disturbed public order” (Art. 3). While not
legally binding, the latter definition has been incorporated into the legal frameworks of many States parties
to the Declaration.

144

The term “asylum seeker” can also refer to a person who has not yet applied for refugee status but may intend to do so or be in need
of international protection. While not every asylum seeker will ultimately be recognized as a refugee, they cannot be sent back to their
countries of origin until their asylum claims have been examined in a fair procedure and they are entitled to certain minimum standards
of treatment pending determination of their status.

145

In the exercise of its mandate, the UNHCR can also recognize people as refugees and does so in some countries.

146

However, 171 UN Member States have ratified the ICESCR and are thus required to ensure the protection of refugees even if they are
not parties to the 1951 Convention or maintain reservations to specific articles thereof. Article 2(1) of the ICESCR states: “Each State
Party to the present Covenant undertakes to take steps, individually and through international assistance and co-operation, especially
economic and technical, to the maximum of its available resources, with a view to achieving progressively the full realization of the rights
recognized in the present Covenant by all appropriate means, including particularly the adoption of legislative measures”.

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

7.2.2 Refugees and access to work
Access to work plays a central role in the social
and economic inclusion of refugees in their host
communities by allowing them to meet their own needs
and contribute to the local economy. Moreover, in
many countries, employment is an essential condition
for certain social security benefits and services. In
these countries, when refugees are denied access
to the formal labour market they are automatically
excluded from social protection benefits. Where access
to decent work is not possible, refugees and asylum
seekers are more likely to accept hazardous work and/
or work in the informal economy in order to support
themselves and their families.
The right to work is enshrined in several international
documents; the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
establishes that “[e]veryone has the right to work, to
free choice of employment, to just and favourable
conditions of work and to protection against
unemployment” (Art. 23) and the ICESCR states that
the States parties thereto “ recognize the right to work,
which includes the right of everyone to the opportunity
to gain his living by work which he freely chooses or
accepts, and will take appropriate steps to safeguard
this right” (Art. 6); they also recognize “the right of
everyone to the enjoyment of just and favourable
conditions of work […]” (Art. 7). In its General Comment
18, the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights notes that this article “lay[s] down specific
legal obligations rather than a simple philosophical
principle” and “defines the right to work in a general
and non-exhaustive manner” (CESCR 2006).
The ILO’s widely ratified Employment Policy
Convention, 1964 (No. 122)147 encourages States to
adopt policies aimed at ensuring that “there is work
for all who are available for and seeking work”.
According to the CEACR, the provisions of the Migration
for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97)
and the Migrant Workers (Supplementary) Convention,
1975 (No. 143) apply to all workers employed outside
their home countries, including refugees (ILO 1999,
para. 101).

147

As at April 2021, there are 115 States parties to this Convention.

148

See also Arts 2(3) and 4 of the ICESCR.

149

Articles 17–19 of the 1951 Convention (on, respectively, wage-earning employment, self-employment
and liberal professions) regulate refugees’ access
to the labour market. Article 17 provides that “The
Contracting State shall accord to refugees lawfully
staying in their territory the most favourable treatment
accorded to nationals of a foreign country in the same
circumstances, as regards the right to engage in
wage-earning employment”. It also limits States’ ability
to impose restrictive measures on the employment of
refugees in order to protect the national economy148
and requires them to “give sympathetic consideration
to assimilating the rights of all refugees with regard
to wage-earning employment to those of nationals,
and in particular of those refugees who have entered
their territory pursuant to programmes of labour
recruitment or under immigration schemes” (Art.
17(3)).
Under Article 18, the Contracting States undertake to
accord refugees “treatment as favourable as possible”
as regards the right to self-employment in agriculture,
industry, handicrafts and commerce. These articles
should be read together with Article 6, which states that
refugees shall be exempt from requirements “which
by their nature a refugee is incapable of fulfilling”.149
Lastly, Article 24 states that refugees shall receive
“the same treatment as is accorded to nationals” with
regard to “remuneration, hours of work, overtime
arrangements, holidays with pay, restrictions on home
work, minimum age of employment, apprenticeship
and training, women’s work and the work of young
persons, and the enjoyment of the benefits of collective
bargaining”.
Refugees’ right to work has been further developed
by the non-binding Michigan Guidelines on the Right
to Work, which stress that this right is enshrined not
only in the 1951 Convention, but also in several other
human rights instruments and that its full recognition
“empowers refugees, enabling self-reliance and contribution to the economy and society” (Colloquium on
Challenges in International Refugee Law 2010, p. 295).
Despite these provisions, however, refugees’ right
to work remains quite limited in most countries. An
assessment of the 20 countries that host 70 percent

Consequently, when applying for a work permit, refugees should be exempt from requirements that, owing to their refugee status, they
will be unable to meet (see Hathaway 2005).

179

180

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

of the world’s refugees, conducted by the ILO and
the Global Knowledge Partnership on Migration and
Development (KNOMAD), found that “[a] restrictive
approach to their right to work prevails, and most states
are reluctant to ease these restrictions. The majority of
refugees work in the informal sector, but under much
less satisfactory and more exploitative conditions
compared with nationals”. In light of these findings,
the assessment states that “more national and international coordination is required [and] multiple actors
should share in the responsibility to deliver decent
work […]” (Zetter and Ruaudel 2016, p. iii).
Discussions on refugees’ access to the labour market
have been held in various international forums,
including the UN Summit on Refugees and Migrants,
which led to the adoption of the New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants in September 2016 and of
the Global Compact on Refugees in 2018 (Box 7.1), and
an ILO tripartite technical meeting in July 2016, which
led to the Governing Body’s adoption of the Guiding
Principles on the Access of Refugees and other Forcibly
Displaced Persons to the Labour Markets in November
2016 (ILO 2016).
The ILO’s Employment and Decent Work for Peace
and Resilience Recommendation 2017 (No. 205) also
mentions refugees’ access to the labour market:

150

See also ILO 2018.

Members should develop and apply active labour
market policies and programmes with a particular
focus on disadvantaged and marginalized groups
and population groups and individuals who
have been made particularly vulnerable by a
crisis, including, but not limited to, persons with
disabilities, internally displaced persons, migrants
and refugees, as appropriate and in accordance
with national laws and regulations (para. 12).
Members should take measures, as appropriate, to:
(a) foster self-reliance by expanding opportunities
for refugees to access livelihood opportunities and
labour markets, without discriminating among
refugees and in a manner which also supports host
communities; and (b) formulate national policy
and national action plans, involving competent
authorities responsible for employment and
labour and in consultation with employers’ and
workers’ organizations, to ensure the protection
of refugees in the labour market, including with
regard to access to decent work and livelihood
opportunities (para. 30). [Emphasis added]150

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

► Box 7.1 The Global Compact on Refugees
The 2016 New York Declaration led to the endorsement of the Global Compact on Refugees by the UN
General Assembly in December 2018. The Compact makes a number of commitments regarding social
protection access for refugees and host communities, including:
► delivering assistance to refugees and host communities through local and national service providers
rather than establishing parallel systems specifically for refugees (para. 66);
► promoting economic opportunities, decent work, job creation and entrepreneurship programmes
(para. 70);
► enhancing the quality of national healthcare systems to facilitate access by refugees and host communities (para. 72);
► supporting the facilitation of access to age-, disability- and gender-responsive social and healthcare
services (para. 75);
► meeting immediate food or nutritional needs, including through the increased use of cash-based
transfers or social protection systems and supporting access to nutrition-sensitive social safety nets
(para. 81).
Part II of the Global Compact is the Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF). Its four key
objectives are to:
1. ease pressure on countries that welcome and host refugees;
2. build self-reliance of refugees;
3. expand access to resettlement in third countries and other complementary pathways;
4. foster conditions that enable refugees voluntarily to return to their home countries.151
In relation to social protection, the CRRF recognizes the economic and social costs borne by low- and middleincome countries hosting large numbers of refugees (para. 6(c)), including pressure on social services, and
calls for the provision of adequate resources to support host countries and communities (para. 8(c)). It
also calls on host states “[d]eliver assistance, to the extent possible, through appropriate national and local
service providers, such as public authorities for health, education, social services and child protection” (para.
7(b)). At the Global Refugee Forum,152 organized by the UNHCR and held in Geneva in December 2019, the
ILO pledged, among other things, to support governments’ efforts to ensure equitable access to social
protection for refugees and host communities.

151
152

UNHCR n.d.
During the Global Refugee Forum (GRF), a number of countries pledged to develop inclusive social protection systems for refugees and
host communities. For example, the Government of Ethiopia undertook to ensure that both refugees and host communities (particularly
vulnerable persons such as women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons) were able to access and benefit from the
national social protection services in a meaningful way. For more information see UNHCR - Global Refugee Forum.

181

182

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

7.2.3 Refugees and the right to social
protection
Access to social protection is a human right enshrined
in several international instruments, which, by
extending this right to every member of society
regardless of legal status, origin or nationality, include
refugees in their scope of application (see Chapter 2).
Articles 20–24 of the 1951 Convention contain
important provisions on welfare and social security.
Article 23 states: “The Contracting States shall accord
to refugees lawfully staying in their territory the same
treatment with respect to public relief and assistance
as is accorded to their nationals”. In its Comments
on the draft general comment [of the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights] on the right
to just and favourable conditions of work (art. 7 of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights), the UNHCR states that this article
“seeks to ensure that refugees are entitled to benefit
from the national social assistance and welfare schemes
enjoyed by nationals, even if they do not meet any of
the conditions of local residence or affiliation which
may be required of nationals. The article must be given
a broad interpretation and includes, inter alia, relief
and assistance to persons in need owing to illness, age,
physical or mental impairment, or other circumstances
and medical care” (UNHCR 2015a, para. 15).
Article 24 of the 1951 Convention states:
1. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees
lawfully staying in their territory the same
treatment as is accorded to nationals in respect
of the following matters;
(a) In so far as such matters are governed by
laws or regulations or are subject to the control
of administrative authorities: remuneration,
including family allowances where these form
part of remuneration, hours of work, overtime
arrangements, holidays with pay, restrictions on
work, minimum age of employment, apprenticeship and training, women’s work and the
work of young persons, and the enjoyment of the
benefits of collective bargaining;
(b) Social security (legal provisions in respect
of employment injury, occupational diseases,
maternity, sickness, disability, old age, death,

153

unemployment, family responsibilities and any
other contingency which, according to national
laws or regulations, is covered by a social security
scheme), subject to the following limitations:
(i) There may be appropriate arrangements
for the maintenance of acquired rights and
rights in course of acquisition;
(ii) National laws or regulations of the country
of residence may prescribe special arrangements concerning benefits or portions of
benefits which are payable wholly out of
public funds, and concerning allowances
paid to persons who do not fulfil the contribution conditions prescribed for the award of
a normal pension.
2. The right to compensation for the death of a
refugee resulting from employment injury or
from occupational disease shall not be affected
by the fact that the residence of the beneficiary
is outside the territory of the Contracting State.
3. The Contracting States shall extend to refugees
the benefits of agreements concluded between
them, or which may be concluded between
them in the future, concerning the maintenance
of acquired rights and rights in the process of
acquisition in regard to social security, subject
only to the conditions which apply to nationals
of the States signatory to the agreements in
question.
4. The Contracting States will give sympathetic
consideration to extending to refugees so far
as possible the benefits of similar agreements
which may at any time be in force between such
Contracting States and non-contracting States.
It should, however, be borne in mind that many
countries formulated reservations to Article 24 and are
therefore not bound by its provisions.153
With regard to the ILO Conventions on social security
analysed above, the Social Security (Minimum
Standards) Convention, 1952 (No. 102) applies to
refugees based on the principle of equality of treatment.
Yet because this principle hinges on reciprocity it can,
in practice, hinder refugees’ access to their rights.
More specifically, Article 68 of the Convention states:

Angola, Canada, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Latvia, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Monaco, New Zealand, Poland, Sweden,
Timor-Leste, the United Kingdom and Zimbabwe made reservations to all or part of Art. 24.

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

1. Non-national residents shall have the same
rights as national residents: Provided that special
rules concerning non-nationals and nationals
born outside the territory of the Member may be
prescribed in respect of benefits or portions of
benefits which are payable wholly or mainly out of
public funds and in respect of transitional schemes.
Furthermore, it outlines that non-nationals will
have the same protection under contributory
social security schemes as nationals provided that
the States have concluded bilateral/multilateral
agreements providing for reciprocity.
2. Under contributory social security schemes which
protect employees, the persons protected who
are nationals of another Member which has
accepted the obligations of the relevant Part of the
Convention shall have, under that Part, the same
rights as nationals of the Member concerned:
Provided that the application of this paragraph may
be made subject to the existence of a bilateral or
multilateral agreement providing for reciprocity.
The Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention,
1962 (No. 118) expressly states: “The provisions of this
Convention apply to refugees and stateless persons
without any condition of reciprocity” (Art. 10(1)). It
establishes that the principle of equality of treatment
should apply in respect of medical care, sickness
benefit, employment injury benefit and family benefit
without condition of residence, although such a
condition may apply to other benefits (Art. 4(2)).
The Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012
(No. 202) calls for the establishment of national social
protection floors comprising basic social security
guarantees to ensure, at a minimum, that all in need
have access to essential health care and basic income
security over their life cycle. These should cover “…at
least all residents and children, as defined in national
laws and regulations” (para. 6).
The Employment and Decent Work for Peace and
Resilience Recommendation, 2017 (No. 205) “applies
to all workers and jobseekers and to all employers,
in all sectors of the economy affected by crisis
situations arising from conflicts and disasters” (para.
4). It goes on to state that “Members should establish,
re-establish or maintain social protection floors, as
well as seek to close the gaps in their coverage, taking
into account the Social Security (Minimum Standards)

Convention, 1952 (No. 102), the Social Protection
Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202) and other
relevant international labour standards”. In section
XI (Refugees and returnees), paragraph 33 states that
“[…] Members should include refugees in the actions
taken with respect to employment, training and labour
market access, as appropriate and in particular: [...]
(f) facilitate, as appropriate, the portability of work-related and social security benefit entitlements, including
pensions, in accordance with the national provisions of
the host country”.
The Migration for Employment Convention (Revised),
1949 (No. 97) applies to migrants for employment,
defined as persons “who migrat[e] from one country
to another with a view to being employed” (Art. 11).
Article 6 of the Convention states:
Each Member for which this Convention is in
force undertakes to apply, without discrimination
in respect of nationality, race, religion or sex, to
immigrants lawfully within its territory, treatment
no less favourable than that which it applies to its
own nationals in respect of the following matters:
[…]
(b) social security (that is to say, legal
provision in respect of employment injury,
maternity, sickness, invalidity, old age, death,
unemployment and family responsibilities,
and any other contingency which, according
to national laws or regulations, is covered
by a social security scheme), subject to the
following limitations:
(i) there may be appropriate arrangements for the maintenance of acquired
rights and rights in course of acquisition;
(ii) national laws or regulations of
immigration countries may prescribe
special arrangements concerning benefits
or portions of benefits which are payable
wholly out of public funds, and concerning
allowances paid to persons who do
not fulfil the contribution conditions
prescribed for the award of a normal
pension;
[…]

183

184

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

On several occasions, the CEACR has expressly
included refugees in the scope of application of
Articles 2, 6 and 7 of the Convention.154
The non-binding Migration for Employment
Recommendation (Revised), 1949 (No. 86) supplements Convention No. 97 and includes provisions on
refugees and displaced persons. In particular, it states
that member States should “facilitate the international
distribution of manpower” (para. 4(1)) and provide
information services, free assistance and medical
assistance. The Model Agreement on Temporary
and Permanent Migration for Employment, including
Migration of Refugees and Displaced Persons,
annexed to the Recommendation, promotes the
exchange of information between the competent
authorities of the countries of emigration and
immigration “or in the case of refugees and displaced
persons, to any body established in accordance with
the terms of an international instrument which may
be responsible for the protection of refugees and
displaced persons” (Arts 1 and 4) and the conclusion
of a separate agreement on social security (Art. 21).
The CEACR has stated that the provisions of the
Migrant
Workers
(Supplementary
Provisions)
Convention, 1975 (No. 143) apply to all workers
employed outside their home countries, including
refugees. The Convention is divided into two parts,
which can be ratified independently of each other. Part
I calls on Members to respect the basic human rights
of all migrant workers, including those in an irregular
situation. Migrant workers whose position cannot
be regularized must enjoy equality of treatment for
[themselves] and [their families “in respect of rights
arising out of past employment as regards remuneration, social security, and other benefits” (Art. 9). Part
II contains provisions aimed at ensuring equality of
opportunity and treatment for migrant workers in
a regular situation, including with respect to social
security (Art. 10).
The provisions of the Migrant Workers Recommendation, 1975 (No. 151) apply to all workers employed
outside of their home countries, including refugees.
The Maintenance of Social Security Rights Convention,
1982 (No.157) promotes the conclusion of bilateral and
multilateral agreements implementing the principle of
the maintenance of rights in the course of acquisition

154

and of acquired rights and specifies that such
agreements should apply to refugees and stateless
persons residing in the territory of a State party (Art.
4(3)). It also states that “[e]ach Member shall guarantee
the provision of invalidity, old-age and survivors’ cash
benefits, pensions in respect of employment injuries
and death grants, to which a right is acquired under
its legislation, to beneficiaries who are nationals of a
Member or refugees or stateless persons, irrespective
of their place of residence” (Art. 9). Nonetheless, it
should be noted that, as at October 2021, only four
States (Kyrgyzstan, the Philippines, Spain and Sweden)
have ratified this Convention.
The Maintenance of Social Security Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167) states: “Members bound by
a bilateral or multilateral social security instrument
should endeavour by mutual agreement to extend
to the nationals of any other Member, as well as to
refugees and stateless persons resident in the territory
of any Member, the benefit of the provisions of that
instrument” (para. 2) with regard to three of the five
key principles related to the coordination of social
security and the protection of migrant workers (see
Chapter 2 above):
► determination of the applicable legislation, which
ensures that the social security of a refugee/
stateless person is governed by the legislation of
only one country at a time;
► maintenance of rights in the course of acquisition,
which allows for the aggregation/totalization of
the periods of insurance, employment or residence required for the acquisition, maintenance
and recovery of rights; and
► maintenance of acquired rights and provision of
benefits abroad, which allows for maintenance of
any acquired right across territories without any
restriction on payment.
The Recommendation also promotes the conclusion
of “administrative or financial arrangements to
remove possible obstacles to the provision of invalidity,
old-age and survivors’ benefits, pensions in respect
of employment injuries and death grants, to which a
right is acquired under their legislation, to beneficiaries
who are nationals of a Member or refugees or stateless
persons resident abroad” (para. 3)

Direct request (CEACR) – adopted 2007, published 97th [International Labour Conference (ILC)] session (2008): Migration for Employment
Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97) – Belize (Ratification: 1983); direct request (CEACR) – adopted 2001, published 90th ILC session (2002):
Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97) – New Zealand (Ratification: 1950).

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

The non-binding Guiding principles on the access of
refugees and other forcibly displaced persons to the
labour market, 2016 (ILO 2016) expressly mention
social protection in two guiding principles:

conditions, access to quality public services,
wages and the right to social security benefits for
refugees and other forcibly displaced persons and
to educate refugees and other forcibly displaced
persons about their labour rights and protections.

19. Members should take steps to facilitate the
portability of work-related entitlements (such
as social security benefits, including pensions)
[…] of refugees and other forcibly displaced
persons between countries of origin, transit and
destination.

Thus, the international legal framework is clear:
granting refugees’ access to social security and
ensuring their social and economic integration is
essential in order to achieve a durable and sustainable
solution for both refugees and host countries. The
application of international standards is, however,
often hindered at the national level by inadequate
national legal and policy frameworks and other
practical obstacles, including, among other things, lack
of information, language barriers and discriminatory
practices. The following section will elaborate on these
challenges and suggest potential solutions.

22. Members should adopt or reinforce national
policies to promote equality of opportunity and
treatment for all, in particular gender equality,
recognizing the specific needs of women, youth
and persons with disabilities, with regard to
fundamental principles and rights at work, working

► Box 7.2 Protecting the rights of refugees and other forcibly displaced persons during the
COVID-19 pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to wreak havoc on nations and their economic activities. Its impact on
the health, employment and social inclusion of nationals has also been felt by refugees and other forcibly
displaced persons, who are finding it increasingly difficult to provide for themselves and their families.
Their precarious legal status and the associated restrictions on their mobility heighten their mental and
physical stress and make it increasingly difficult for them to obtain and maintain employment and social
protection. This further exacerbates the negative impact of COVID-19 while reducing their access to coping
strategies. The challenges that they face include:
► loss of income and jobs, which increases their food insecurity, limits their access to healthcare and places
continuous education for their children at risk;
► limited access to social protection owing to requirements (nationality, valid work permits or formal
employment) that effectively exclude refugees and their families;
► difficulty in applying COVID-19-related workplace protection measures owing to the type of occupation
or limited access to personal protective equipment;
► erosion of working conditions and weakened prospects for social integration owing to the socio-economic effects of the pandemic, particularly as refugees’ bargaining power is limited;
► risk of gender-based violence, forced labour and child labour owing to the increasingly vulnerable situation of refugee populations during the pandemic;
► the negative economic impact of the virus on micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises and own-account workers with limited access to finance, land and property and low savings, investment and cash
reserves.
In order to mitigate the negative impact of the pandemic on refugees and other forcibly displaced persons,
it is of paramount importance that all stakeholders – including governments and employers’ and workers’
organizations – understand that international labour standards are central to this response. Specific policy
options may be divided into two categories:

185

186

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Protecting refugees in the workplace by:
► identifying and monitoring refugees’ specific needs through rapid assessments (examples include Iraq,
Pakistan and Tunisia);
► simplifying procedures for obtaining and renewing work permits in order to prevent refugees from
falling into an irregular situation. Italy, Ireland, Poland and Portugal took steps to extend or automatically renew documents related to residence or asylum status during the peak months of the crisis;
► ensuring fair wages and access to justice, irrespective of legal status;
► enabling refugees’ representation through the exercise of their right to freedom of association and
collective bargaining;
► providing all workers, irrespective of status, with the necessary means and information to apply workplace safety and health measures and ensuring that information is available in a language that the
refugees can understand. In Italy, a multilingual information portal, JUMA, provides refugees and asylum
seekers with information on COVID-19 in 15 different languages;
► taking measures to counter discrimination, violence and harassment at work.
Ensuring inclusive and sustainable recovery by:
► recognizing refugees’ skills and contribution to recovery by lifting restrictions and giving them access
to employment in essential sectors (such as the medical professions, logistics, food and retail) in times
of crisis;
► ensuring that refugees and their families have access to social protection measures as an indispensable
element of crisis response in order to keep them from slipping deeper into poverty;
► enabling refugees with disabilities to participate fully in the world of work through disability-inclusive
occupational safety and health (OSH) and social protection measures and accessible and inclusive
working conditions. If adequately protected, refugees with disabilities can be as productive as persons
without disabilities;
► including refugee workers and entrepreneurs in economic stimulus measures, such as management
and resilience training, so that they can acquire the necessary skills and capacities to adapt their businesses during the crisis;
► encouraging social cohesion through balanced job creation programmes for both nationals and
refugees.
Source: ILO 2020

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

►7.3 Obstacles, protection gaps
and challenges
Refugees’ effective access to social security in the host
country is influenced by several factors, including the
State’s legal and administrative framework and social
security system and the active steps that it takes in
order to facilitate such access. These factors, like those
analysed in other chapters in the context of migrant
workers’ access to social protection, are of two kinds.
On the one hand, they may be related to the host
country’s legal system or to its bilateral or multilateral
agreements with the sending country; on the other,
even where refugees theoretically have access to
such rights, their effective enjoyment can be hindered
by hurdles such as lack of knowledge, lack of funds,
administrative and language barriers and discrimination.

7.3.1 Legal obstacles
Refugees and asylum seekers may be legally excluded
from the legislative framework of the host country.
An analysis of the legislation of 120 countries found that
only 56 States’ legislation contained explicit provisions
granting refugees access to social security and that
only 40 States granted such access to asylum seekers
(Van Panhuys, Kazi-Aoul and Binette 2017).
Refugees face specific obstacles to contributory and
non-contributory social protection owing to their
nationality, residence (often temporary) status, type of
employment, unpredictable length of stay and limited
number of years of contributions. These obstacles may
also prevent them from accessing the formal labour
market, and thus employment-based social protection.
A number of countries have been reluctant to grant
refugees access to the labour market, particularly in
cases of massive influx, because they fear distortion of
the labour market and increased unemployment rates
among the host population.
It should be borne in mind that massive influxes of
refugees have the greatest impact on neighbouring,
and particularly low- and middle-income, countries
that are struggling with pre-existing socio-economic challenges. In 2019, 85 per cent of the world’s
refugees were hosted in developing regions, which
often lack effective national social security protection
systems even for their own nationals (UNHCR 2019).
Without adequate international solidarity, refugees’
protection may remain temporary and limited.

155

Moreover, countries may be reluctant to give refugees
access to social protection as this might be seen as a
first step towards more permanent residence or local
integration. In addition, as mentioned above, not all
countries have ratified the 1951 Convention155 and the
fact that many States parties have formulated reservations to some of its articles, including those related to
social protection, is a major impediment to refugees’
enjoyment of their social protection rights.
Like migrant workers, refugees who apply for social
security benefits in the host country commonly find it
difficult to qualify for benefits and, in particular, longterm benefits (old age, survivors’ and invalidity); for
example, pensions provided through a contributory
scheme often require a minimum number of contributory years. Many working-age and older refugees
have spent some of their productive years in the
country from which they fled and must start from
zero in the host country. Moreover, where States have
collapsed and regimes changed, the previous social
security system may have been dissolved and all contributions to it lost.
Furthermore, because refugees are, by definition,
people who have fled their country of origin for fear
of persecution, they cannot avail themselves of its
protection. As a consequence, the so-called “social
contract” with that country, which involves the
payment of taxes and other obligations in return for
social protection, access to education, healthcare and
other rights, is also broken (Makhema 2009). For this
reason, refugees often lose the contributions that they
have paid in their country of origin and even where
bilateral or multilateral social security agreements
exist, they may no longer be applied by the home
country, especially in situations of internal conflict or
lack of effective governance. However, where both
the host and the destination country are parties to
the 1951 Convention, they are both obliged to extend
to refugees the benefits identified in any agreements
between them, “subject only to the conditions which
apply to nationals of the States signatory to the
agreements in question” (Art. 24(3)).

7.3.2 Practical obstacles
In addition to these hurdles, refugees often face other
practical obstacles of a non-legal nature.
For instance, as stated above, even where national
law grants refugees legal access to social protection,
it may be unavailable in practice owing to language or
cultural barriers, discrimination, administrative issues

As at July 2021, there are 149 States parties to the Convention and/or its Protocol.

187

188

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

or lack of information and awareness of their rights.
(see Chapter 1). Discrimination in host countries may
be directed towards specific groups of refugees owing
to historical, religious, ethnic and political tension
between the host country and the refugees’ country
of origin. The administrative barriers faced by refugees
are compounded by the difficulty or impossibility of
requesting the administration or institutions of their
countries of origin to supply missing information and
documents on social protection contributions and
other matters.
Moreover, refugees are often not represented or
consulted during the design and implementation of
programmes of relevance to them. This top-down
approach to policymaking fails to take into account their
unique experience, expertise about their communities
and knowledge of gaps in service delivery. Thus,
policies and programmes designed without consulting
refugees and their families do not adequately meet
their needs. It should, however, be noted that recent
years have seen a trend towards greater inclusion and
participation of refugees in decision-making processes,
as evidenced by the 2016 New York Declaration for
Refugees and Migrants and the 2018 Global Compact
on Refugees. Nonetheless, putting these provisions
into practice remains a challenge (Harley and Hobbs
2020).

approved or after a certain period of time. However,
this entitlement is often limited to specific sectors
or to a maximum number of hours per month.157
In addition, asylum seekers who are awaiting a decision
on their applications may have limited social protection
rights under national laws (for example, access only
to healthcare). In any event, it should be noted that
these rights are typically not on par with those granted
to nationals or to other foreign residents. Moreover,
asylum procedures can be long and subject to delay.
Applicants who are denied refugee status can, in some
instances, lodge an appeal but this will entail another
extended waiting period without regularized status
and, in some instances, additional legal fees.

►7.4 From right to reality: country
practices
7.4.1 Why extend social protection to
refugees and asylum seekers?

7.3.3 Specific obstacles faced by
asylum seekers

There are a variety of reasons for providing refugees
and asylum seekers with social protection. Everyone,
including refugees, has the right to social security
in accordance with international human rights law.
Protecting refugees against life’s risks (such as sickness,
maternity, old-age and occupational injury) not only
improves their income security and reduces household
poverty; it also reduces the prevalence of disease and
illness and ultimately provides host countries with
more productive, healthy and employable workers,
thus improving their economic and social situation
(UNHCR 2012a). Ensuring refugees’ access to work and
to social protection in the host country is also a way to
support durable solutions in the context of protracted
situations. Refugees and asylum seekers provide an
important source of labour and new ideas and perspectives. Overall, their participation in the local economy
increases their level of integration into the community
and reduces dependency (ASCR 2013, 3–4; ArnoldFernández and Pollock 2013).

Owing to their pending refugee status, asylum seekers
often do not enjoy the same rights as refugees or
nationals of the host country: they usually do not have
residence status and may not have the right to work,
to education and even to travel within the country.
In some countries, asylum seekers are entitled to
work, either as soon as their asylum application is

Participation in the formal economy allows refugees
to meet their own needs and contribute to the fiscal
and social security systems of their host country.
Integrating them into the country’s social protection
system rather than creating parallel structures reduces
tension between refugees and host communities,
enhances the financial sustainability of national social

Lastly, while geographical and financial barriers156
affect both nationals and refugees, they often place
a heavier burden on the latter because they are
compounded by the other obstacles mentioned above.
The fact that many refugees live in remote areas or
refugee camps and are employed in the informal
sector at low wages and with limited or no access to
finance makes it impossible for many families to afford
basic necessities, healthcare, housing, education and
transportation or to make social contributions.

156

For example, the inability to pay contributions or to make cash payments for healthcare.

157

For instance, while Sweden grants asylum seekers immediate access to the labour market, in Italy access is not granted until two months
after an asylum application has been approved while Austria allows employment only in certain public sectors and limits the number of
hours worked per month. Outside Europe, countries such as Armenia, Ethiopia, Jordan, South Africa, Turkey, and some Latin American
countries also grant asylum seekers only limited access to work. For more information, see: http://www.migrationwatchuk.org/briefingpaper/316.

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

security systems and reduces financial pressure on
non-contributory social protection mechanisms,
including humanitarian cash transfers. Excluding
refugees from the formal labour market may force
them to accept precarious or hazardous employment,
thus increasing the risk of occupational diseases and
injuries, abuse and exploitation. It also increases the
risk of social dumping with a boomerang effect on the
labour conditions of regular workers; the opportunity
to circumvent the regular employment and taxation
system can lead to downward pressure on wages
and working conditions, particularly for low-skilled
workers. While this sounds easy on paper, the creation
or adaptation of existing systems is often constrained
by political will and/or fiscal space, factors that must be
overcome in light of the net positive contribution that
properly-integrated refugees and asylum seekers have
on countries of destination.
In conclusion, the incorporation of refugees and
asylum seekers into the labour market and the social
protection system can help to promote social justice,
regenerate the tax system and stabilize the effects of
an ageing population.

7.4.2 Policy options and country
practices
States have a responsibility under international law to
ensure refugees’ access to social protection. There are
a number of policy options and measures that they can
adopt in order to fulfil this obligation and to overcome
the legal and practical obstacles highlighted above.
At the outset, they should ratify the relevant legal
instruments and bring their legislation into line with
international standards, including the 1951 Convention,
the 1967 Protocol thereto, the 1976 ICESCR and the
relevant ILO Conventions. They should also consider
establishing new or adapting existing social protection
systems – including social protection floors – in order
to address the specific needs of refugees and asylum
seekers, especially with regard to contributory and
residency requirements.
National legal frameworks should provide refugees
with access to social protection and provide for equality
of treatment between refugees and nationals.

158

Act No. 130 (1998).

159

Acts Nos 11 (2017), 10 (2015), 12 (2011) and 33 (2008).

160

Arts L512-2 and L816-1.

Examples:
► Paraguay’s Refugee Act states that “[r]efugees
have the right to work, to social security and
to education under the same conditions as
citizens” (Act No. 1938 (2002), Art. 25).
► Most of the EU countries and, among others,
Armenia, Mauritania, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Paraguay, Senegal, the Republic of Korea,
Switzerland, Uruguay have similar legislative
provisions.
► South Africa’s Refugees Act158 and the
amendments thereto159 establish refugees’
right to employment and access to social
security, including child, disability, old-age and
foster care benefits, social relief of distress and
the care dependency grant.
► In Burkina Faso, refugees have access to basic
services such as healthcare pursuant to Act
No. 042–2008 on the status of refugees and
Decree No. 2011–119 on the modalities for its
implementation.
► In the Democratic Republic of Congo, refugees
can access social protection, where available, on
the same basis as nationals pursuant to Act No.
021/2001.
► In 2020, Djibouti amended its Presidential
Decree governing the social registry to include
refugees. This represents a major policy
advance that paves the way for their access to
social protection schemes, including the Health
Social Assistance Programme and the National
Family Solidarity Programme.
Existing social protection benefits can be adapted in
order to make them accessible to refugees, including
by removing or easing the minimum residence requirements.
Examples:
► In France, provisions of the Social Security Code
expressly exempt refugees from the residence
requirements for access to family and old-age
benefits.160

189

190

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Under Australia’s system, refugees are exempt
from the two-year waiting period that normally
hinders foreign nationals’ access to social
security.161
States should identify and adopt measures that
remove the practical barriers to refugees’ effective
enjoyment of their rights. These measures could
include information campaigns, hiring cultural-lin-

guistic mediators, translating documents and
pamphlets into other languages, conducting anti-discrimination campaigns and reflecting cultural diversity
in their legal and administrative systems. Finally,
host countries and the international community can
channel humanitarian assistance and/or development
aid to strengthen social protection systems for both
refugees and host communities.

► Box 7.3 Brazil’s promotion of refugee rights
In Brazil, the State Committees for Refugees create links among the various stakeholders involved in the
policymaking process and promote respect for refugees’ rights. These Committees, which are active in areas
such as Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and Paraná, are composed of representatives of state governments, civil
society institutions and the Office of the UNHCR Representative in Brazil (Jubilut 2010; UNHCR 2010b; Oliveria
2014). They are responsible for implementing the National Plan for Refugees, monitoring its outcomes,
supporting the conclusion of agreements among the relevant institutions and promoting awareness of
refugees’ rights among public agents through the distribution of information.
The Committees are organized into six thematic workgroups on, among other things, health, education and
access to labour markets. In 2010, in cooperation with the Federal Government and the National Committee
for Refugees, they promoted labour mobility pathways for Haitians affected by the 2010 earthquake; some
45,000 Haitians who did not meet the 1951 Convention ’s definition of “refugee” received five-year permits
that could be automatically converted into work permits upon proof of employment. A similar scheme was
implemented in 2013, whereby the Federal Government granted entrance visas to individuals affected by
the crisis in Syria who did not qualify as refugees under the 1951 Convention. Everyone who entered Brazil
through this scheme had automatic access to the labour market although, in practice, many of them could
not find work (ILO 2016).

161

Australia Social Security Act (1991), as amended, sect. 7.

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

► Box 7.4 Morocco’s reform enhancing the rights of migrants, refugees
and asylum seekers
Traditionally a country of emigration and transit, Morocco is increasingly becoming a country of destination.
In 2013, at the request of its King, the country embarked on a reform process designed to enhance the rights
of migrants, refugees and asylum seekers. The National Human Rights Council’s 2013 report on the situation
of migrants and refugees in Morocco called on the Government to develop a comprehensive and inclusive
plan and formalize a legal framework based on the principles established in the 2011 Constitution and in
international agreements ratified by the country.
As a result, several measures have been taken, including the creation of a Ministry in charge of Moroccans
Living Abroad and Migration Affairs in October 2013, the opening of an Office for Refugees and Stateless
Persons in Rabat and the granting of residency permits to refugees and asylum seekers and their families. In
January 2014, an initial campaign regularized about 23,000 migrants with irregular status and in December
2014, the National Policy on Immigration and Asylum (NPIA) was adopted. Since 2014, Morocco has also
been implementing the National Immigration and Asylum Strategy with a view to improving the integration
of regular migrants. The State ratified the Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97) in
June 2019.162
The NPIA incorporates the recommendations made by the National Human Rights Council in its 2013 report
and promotes the principle of equality of treatment between nationals and foreign nationals. It protects
irregular immigrants, as well as refugees and asylum seekers, through regularization and the development
of integration policies and training programmes for law enforcement officers. Morocco has undertaken
legal reforms within the framework of this Policy, including the adoption of legislation on migration, asylum
and trafficking in persons.
The steps taken in order to integrate refugees and migrants in an irregular situation into Moroccan society
are noteworthy. A second regularization campaign, conducted from December 2016 to December 2017,
enabled the regularization of 14,000 of the 26,000 applicants (North Africa Post 2018). Through the NPIA,
the country has also moved from a restrictive law on migration, enacted in 2003, to a system that gives
resident migrants the right to work and to social protection. This represents a remarkable example of policy
change considering that prior to 2013, Morocco had no official legal structures for effectively addressing
issues relating to migrants and refugees (Morocco, Ministry of External Affairs and International Cooperation 2019); the only relevant regulation, the 2003 Foreign Nationals Act, largely ignored migrants’ and
refugees’ rights and imposed severe sanctions on irregular immigrants. Three bills on immigration, asylum
and trafficking have been developed in order to replace that Act and one, the Human Trafficking Act, was
adopted in 2016.163

162

Morocco ratified the International Convention for the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families in
1933.

163

Act No. 27-14 of 25 August 2016 on combating trafficking in persons (https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=frandp_
isn=103357andp_count=3andp_classification=03).

191

192

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

►7.5 Addressing social protection
gaps: The ILO’s response
The ILO supports its constituents by building a
knowledge base, providing technical advisory services
and capacity-building and promoting social dialogue in
order to facilitate refugees’ access to labour markets
and social protection.
In July 2016, the ILO and the UNHCR signed a revised
MoU on the promotion of decent work for refugees and
other forcibly displaced persons and agreed on a Joint
Action Plan164 for its implementation. Social protection
is included in the Plan’s goals and strategic objectives.
Examples of ILO support:
► The ILO provided technical advisory services
and input to Jordan’s Refugee Response Plan in
2016–2017.
► Training programmes and South-South exchanges on social protection for refugees were
held in, among other locations, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Italy, Mexico and Tanzania, between 2016
and 2020.
► In 2016–2017, the UNHCR and the ILO provided
the Mexican City authorities with technical
advisory services on adapting local programmes
to the needs of migrants and refugees.165
Recent partnerships and projects:
► The ILO–UNHCR–[United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF)]–World Bank–International Finance Corporation (IFC) Partnership for improving prospects for host communities and
forcibly displaced persons (PROSPECTS) (2019–
2023), financed by the Netherlands, “aims to
shift the paradigm from a humanitarian to a
development approach in responding to forced
displacement crises”166 in Egypt, Ethiopia, Iraq,

Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Sudan and Uganda.
“Under the umbrella of PROSPECTS, the ILO
and partner governments are looking to work
across humanitarian and development processes using social protection systems to provide predictable and sustainable support for
displaced populations and host communities
beyond the short-term intent of international
humanitarian assistance”.167
► In Turkey, the ILO supports the social security
institution under the Ministry of Family, Labour
and Social Services through the Transition
to Formality Programme (KIGEP), launched
in 2019, which helps refugees and host
communities to access formal employment and
social security.168
► Several ILO–UNHCR small scale projects,
implemented between 2017 and 2019, explored
innovative ways to integrate refugees into
existing national health insurance schemes
in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Mauritania,
Rwanda, Senegal and Sudan. In Rwanda, the
project led to the enrolment of over 6,000 urban
refugees in community-based health insurance.
► An
ILO–UNHCR–EU
project,
Promoting
Employment and Social Protection under the
Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework
in Central America and Mexico, was launched
in mid-2019 and includes activities focusing
on refugees (in Mexico and Costa Rica) and
returnees and domestically displaced persons
(in Honduras).
► The International University College of Turin
(IUC)–International Training Centre of the
ILO (ITCILO) implemented a partnership
programme on research and applications
through law clinics in 2016.

164

The first such Plan covers the period 2017–2019 while the current one covers the period 2020–2021.

165

Barriers to foreign nationals in general were removed and returnees (Mexicans deported by other countries), refugees and migrants
were entitled to 6 months of unemployment benefits on the same basis as Mexican nationals. However, this rule applies only to Mexico
City.

166

https://www.government.nl/latest/news/2019/12/18/netherlands-takes-joint-action-to-support-refugees-and-host-communitieswith-prospects-partnership#:~:text=Prospects%20is%20an%20international%20partnership,responding%20to%20forced%20
displacement%20crises.

167

https://www.ilo.org/global/programmes-and-projects/prospects/themes/social-protection/lang--en/index.htm.

168

For more information, see: https://www.ilo.org/ankara/news/WCMS_739375/lang--en/index.htm.

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

► Box 7.5 Turkey’s Transition to Formality Programme (KIGEP)
In Turkey, the ILO has helped host communities to ensure refugees’ access to formal employment and social
security under the Transition to Formality Programme (KIGEP). Turkey hosts the world’s largest number of
refugees (4 million), primarily from Syria, most of whom are working informally and have limited access to
social protection. Since 2019, the ILO has been cooperating with the country’s Social Security Institution
in the implementation of this Programme, which has been scaled up considerably since its pilot phase in
2017 and, by mid-2020, had made over 4,800 formal job placements. KIGEP Plus, the second phase of the
Programme, is ongoing with a focus on both Turkish and Syrian workers.
The ILO covers refugees’ work permit fees and social security premiums for six months, after which they
receive protection under the country’s labour legislation and access to social security on an equal basis
with members of their host communities. Companies are eligible for supplementary support under the
Programme, enhancing its sustainability. Since early 2020, under KIGEP Plus, the ILO has supported the
placement of more than 1,200 workers in formal jobs. The Programme is being implemented in nine
provinces with a focus on the areas in which most refugees live: the south-eastern portion of the country,
Anatolia and the large cities of western Turkey. Of the refugees served, 50 per cent are Syrian and 20 per cent
are women. The main sector of employment is manufacturing with more than half of all workers employed
in the textile industry.
Complementing the ILO’s support, the Office of the UNHCR Representative in Turkey provides livelihood
incentives, educational grants and scholarships to support refugees’ access to higher education and the
labour market and strengthen their self-reliance and general social cohesion. Some 3,000 refugees received
educational grants and scholarship and almost 400 benefitted from livelihood incentives during the first
nine months of 2020.

► 7.6 Conclusion
Extending social protection to refugees is not only a
State’s obligation under international and regional
law; it also contributes to economic growth in the host
country by facilitating more inclusive societies.
The right to social protection is enshrined in several
international instruments. Social protection plays
a central role in ensuring the social and economic
inclusion and long-term sustainability of refugees by
allowing them to meet their own needs and contribute
to their host country’s economy. Moreover, in many
countries, formal employment is an essential condition
for access to social security.
However, despite the clear international framework,
refugees’ access to social protection is often hindered
by various obstacles. In addition to the legal and
practical barriers faced by all migrants (see Chapter
3), refugees cannot avail themselves of the protection
of their home countries and may thus lose all of the
benefits that they had acquired prior to their flight.
The fact that asylum seekers are particularly at risk of
exclusion from both the labour market and the social
security system has a particularly negative impact,
especially since the determination of refugee status
can take months or even years.

Extending contributory and non-contributory social
protection to refugees not only fulfils the host State’s
obligation to ensure their enjoyment of the human
right to social security; it also increases their resilience
and reduces poverty, exclusion, vulnerability and the
incidence of child labour. This is particularly important
in the context of a crisis such as the COVID-19 pandemic.
The incorporation of refugees into social healthcare
systems is a cost-effective solution and helps to reduce
tensions between refugees and host communities.
In addition, emergency cash and food assistance for
refugees and asylum seekers should be incorporated
into longer-term strategies and be channelled through
existing social protection systems wherever possible.
Ensuring refugees’ access to work and to employment-based social protection allows them to contribute
to their host countries’ socio-economic development.
Thus, strengthening social protection systems benefits
both refugees and host communities.
To that end, it is recommended that States ratify and
implement the international Conventions of relevance
to refugees’ rights and social protection; take steps
to ensure their inclusion under policies, emergency
measures and national social protection schemes; and
remove the practical obstacles that compromise their
effective enjoyment of their rights.

193

194

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Bibliography
Allain, Jean. 2001. “The jus cogens nature of non-refoulement”. International Journal of Refugee Law
13: 533-558.
Arnold-Fernández, Emily and Stewart Pollock. 2013. “Refugees’ right to work”. Forced Migration
Review 44: 92-93.
Asylum Access. 2011. To Have Work is to Have Life: Refugees’ Experience with the Right to work in
Ecuador. Quito: Asylum Access.
Asylum Access and Refugee Work Rights Coalition. 2014. Global Refugee Work Rights Report.
Barone, Guglielmo and Sauro Mocetti. 2011. “With a Little Help from Abroad: The Effect of Lowskilled Immigration on the Female Labour Supply”. Labour Economics 18 (5): 664–675.
Betts, Alexander, Louise Bloom, Josiah Kaplan and Naohiko Omata. 2014. Refugee Economies:
Rethinking Popular Assumptions published by the Humanitarian Innovation Project. Oxford, UK:
University of Oxford.
Bevelander, Pieter. 2016. “Integrating Refugees into Labor Markets Economic Integration of
Refugees into their Host Country is Important and Benefits Both Parties”, IZA World of Labour
269.
Boslaugh, Sarah. 2013. Health Care Systems Around the World: A Comparative Guide. Saint Louis, US:
Sage Publications.
Brolan, Claire. 2002. “An Analysis of the Human Smuggling Trade and the Protocol against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Air and Sea (2000) from a Refugee Protection Perspective”.
International Journal of Refugee Law 14(4): 561–596.
Canonge, James. Building Social Protection Floors with the ILO: Together, to Change the Lives of
Millions of Refugees. Geneva: ILO. https://www.social-protection.org/gimi/gess/RessourcePDF.
action?id=53288.
CESCR (UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights). 2009. General Comment No. 20:
Non-Discrimination in Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
–––. 2006. General Comment No. 18: The Right to Work (Art. 6 of the Covenant).
Colloquium on Challenges in International Refugee Law. 2010. “The Michigan Guidelines on the
Right to Work”. Michigan Journal of International Law 31(2): 292–306.
Cortes, Patricia and Jessica Pan. 2013. “Outsourcing Household Production: Foreign Domestic
Workers and Native Labor Supply in Hong Kong”. Journal of Labor Economics 31 (2): 327– 371.
Del Carpio, Ximena and Mathis Wagner. 2015. “The Impact of Syrians Refugees on the Turkish
Labor Market”. World Bank.
del Rocío Sáenz, María, Juan Luis Bermúdez and Mónica Acost. 2010. “Universal Coverage in a Middle
Income Country: Costa Rica”. WHO World Health Report Background Paper No. 11. WHO.
Domenech, Eduardo. 2007. “La agenda política sobre migraciones en América del sur: el caso de la
Argentina”. Revue européenne des migrations internationales 23 (1): 71–94.
Duffy, Aoife. 2008. “Expulsion to Face Torture? Non-refoulement in International Law”. International
Journal of Refugee Law 20 (3): 373–390.
Evans, Williams N. and Daniel Fitzgerald. 2017. “The Economic and Social Outcomes of Refugees in
the United States: Evidence from the ACS”. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Foged, Mette and Giovanni Peri. 2016. “Immigrants’ Effect on Native Workers: New Analysis on
Longitudinal Data”. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (2): 1–34.

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

FRA (European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights). 2011. Fundamental rights of migrants in an
irregular situation in the European Union Comparative report. Vienna.
Furtado, Delia and Heinrich Hock. 2010. “Low Skilled Immigration and Work-Fertility Trade-Offs
among High Skilled US Natives”. American Economic Review 100 (2): 224–28.
Gilbert, Geoff. 2004. “Is Europe Living up to its Obligations to Refugees?” European Journal of
International Law 15 (5): 963–987.
Hathaway, James. 2005. The Rights of Refugees Under International Law. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Harley, Tristan and Harry Hobbs. 2020. “The Meaningful Participation of Refugees in DecisionMaking Processes: Questions of Law and Policy”. International Journal of Refugee Law 32 (2):
200–226.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 1999. General Survey on the Reports on the Migration for
Employment Convention (Revised) (No. 97), and Recommendation (Revised) (No. 86), 1949, and the
Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention (No. 143), and Recommendation (No. 151),
1975. ILC.87/III(1B).
–––. 2011. La inmigración laboral de sudamericanos en Argentina.
–––. 2014. World Social Protection Report 2014/15: Building Economic Recovery, Inclusive Development
and Social Justice.
–––. 2015. Report of the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations. ILC.104/III(1A).
–––. 2016. Guiding principles: Access of Refugees and Other Forcibly Displaced Persons to the Labour
Market.
–––. 2018. Building Social Protection for All: ILO Global Flagship Programme, 2018 Annual Report.
–––. 2020. Protecting the Rights at Work of Refugees and Other Forcibly Displaced Persons during the
COVID-19 Pandemic: Recommendations for Policy-makers and Constituents.
–––. n.d. Refugees’ Integration in the EU Labour Markets: Seizing the Opportunities - Addressing the
Challenges.
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---europe/---ro-geneva/---ilo-brussels/
documents/genericdocument/wcms_429075.pdf.
Joona, Pernilla Andersson, Alma Wennemo Lanninger and Marianne Sundström. 2016. “Reforming
the Integration of Refugees: The Swedish Experience”. Bonn: IZA.
Jubilut, Liliana Lyra. 2010. Melhorando a integração dos refugiados: novas iniciativas no Brasil. Brasilia:
Office of the UNHCR Representative in Brazil.
Lauterpacht, Sir Elihu and Daniel Bethlehem. 2003. “The scope and content of the principle of nonrefoulement: Opinion”. Refugee Protection in International Law: UNHCR’s Global Consultations
on International Protection, edited by Erika Feller, Volker Türk and Frances Nicholson, 87–177.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Levine, David I. and Rachel Gardner.2008. Briefing Paper: Health care in Cambodia. Berkeley, US:
University of California.
Makhema, Mpho. 2009. Social Protection for Refugees and Asylum Seekers in the Southern Africa
Development Community (SADC). Washington, DC: World Bank.
Martin, Iván et al. 2016. From Refugees to Workers: Mapping Labour-Market Integration Support
Measures for Asylum Seekers and Refugees in EU Member States. Volume I: Comparative Analysis
and Policy Findings. Gütersloh, Germany: Bertelsmann Stiftung and Migration Policy Centre.

195

196

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Moreira, Julia Bertino and Rosana Baeninger. 2010. A integração local de refugiados no Brasil. Brasilia:
Office of the UNHCR Representative in Brazil.
Morocco, Ministry of External Affairs and International Cooperation. 2019. Politique Nationale
d’Immigration et d’Asile: Rapport 2018.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine. 2017. The Economic and Fiscal
Consequences of Immigration. Washington, DC.
Nyenti, Mathias, Meryl du Plessis and Lydia Akena Paon. 2007. Access to Social Services for NonCitizens and the Portability of Social Benefits Within the Southern African Development Community
(SADC). World Bank.
Oliveria, Beatriz. 2014. “Comitê Intersetorial para Refugiados retoma as atividades no Rio de
Janeiro”. Brasilia: Office of the UNHCR Representative in Brazil. http://www.acnur.org/t3/
portugues/noticias/noticia/comite-intersetorial-para-refugiados-retoma-as-atividades-no-riode-janeiro/.
Ruist, Joakim 2015. “The Fiscal Cost of Refugee Immigration: The Example of Sweden”. Population
and Development Review 41 (4): 567–581.
Seidl-Konle, Regina and Georg Bolits. 2016. Labour Market Integration of Refugees: Strategies and
Good Practices. Brussels: European Parliament.
Tan, Peck-Leong and John Gibson. 2013. “Impact of Foreign Maids on Female Labor Force
Participation in Malaysia”. Asian Economic Journal 27 (2): 163–183.
The North Africa Post. 2018. “Morocco Softens Regularization Requirements for Migrants”. 30 March
2018.
https://northafricapost.com/22940-morocco-softens-regularization-requirementsmigrants.html.
UN (United Nations). 2018. General Assembly resolution A/73/12, Report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees Part II Global Compact on Refugees. https://www.unhcr.org/
the-global-compact-on-refugees.html
UNCHR (Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). 1997. Note on the Principle
of Non-Refoulement.
–––. 2010a. Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees with an Introductory Note
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
–––. 2010b. Rio instala Comitê Estadual para Refugiados.
–––. 2011a. Promoting Livelihoods and Self-reliance Operational Guidance on Refugee Protection and
Solutions in Urban Areas.
–––. 2011b. Ensuring Access to Health Care. Operational Guidance on Refugee Protection and Solutions
in Urban Areas.
–––. 2011c. Resettlement Handbook.
–––. 2012a. A Guidance Note on Health Insurance Schemes for Refugees and other Persons of Concern
to UNHCR.
–––. 2012b. Livelihood Programming in UNHCR: Operational Guidelines.
–––. 2015a. UNHCR Comments on the Draft General Comment [of the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights] on the Right to Just and Favourable Conditions of Work (Art. 7 of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights). https://www.refworld.org/
pdfid/55509dc14.pdf.

Chapter 7
Extending social protection to refugees and asylum seekers

–––. 2015b. World at War: UNHCR Global Trends. Forced Displacement in 2014.
–––. 2018a. UNHCR Global Trends: Forced Displacement in 2018.
–––. 2018b. Admission and Stay Based on Human Rights and Humanitarian Grounds: A mapping of
National Practice.
–––. 2019. UNHCR Global Trends: Forced Displacement in 2019.
–––. 2020. UNHCR Global Trends: Forced Displacement in 2020.
–––. n.d. Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework: Delivering More Comprehensive and Predictable
Responses for Refugees. https://www.unhcr.org/en-us/comprehensive-refugee-responseframework-crrf.html.
University of Michigan Law School. 2010. The Michigan Guidelines on the Right to Work.
Van Ballegooij, Wouter and Cecilia Navarra. 2018. The Cost of Non-Europe in Asylum Policy. Brussels:
European Parliament.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2010. Poverty and Social Exclusion in the WHO European Region:
Health Systems Respond.
Zetter, Roger and Héloïse Ruaudel. 2016. Refugees’ Right to Work and Access to Labor Markets – An
Assessment. World Bank.

197

198

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

199

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour
migration

200

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Key messages
► Gender shapes the migration experience in many ways and influences how, when and why women and girls, as
well as men and boys, migrate. This is also true of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons and
those who do not conform to traditional gender roles, who may face discrimination in their home countries
and decide to seek opportunities elsewhere. Gender norms affect power relations, employment opportunities
and working conditions and can lead to inequality in access to social protection rights. At the same time,
migration can also empower men and women.
► Women workers, especially migrants, face multiple forms of discrimination when attempting to access social
protection. In many countries, social insurance schemes are designed around a male breadwinner model169
based on the assumption that each family has an uninterrupted, full-time worker in the formal economy.
Informality and persistent inequality in the earnings of men and women, particularly those from marginalized
communities, limits women migrant workers’ ability to meet the qualifying conditions for social insurance
schemes. They may also be at higher risk of sexual and gender-based violence, abuse, exploitation and human
trafficking, further exacerbating their vulnerability.
► Based on the principle of equality of treatment and non-discrimination, established in international human
rights instruments and international labour standards, social protection systems and schemes should take the
specificities of migrant women and men into account and promote gender equality.
► Social protection systems and schemes, including SPFs, can contribute to women’s economic empowerment
and increase gender equality if they are designed, implemented and monitored in a gender-responsive
manner. Conversely, gender-blind schemes and systems can perpetuate and even exacerbate unequal gender
relations.
► Well-designed national SPFs170 aimed at guaranteeing social protection benefits for all and gender-responsive
social security agreements are essential in closing coverage gaps and redressing gender inequality in access
to social protection.
► Enhanced awareness and understanding of gender gaps, as well as experience with social protection and
migration, can lead to the design and implementation of more-gender-responsive strategies and schemes
aimed at enhancing migrant workers’ enjoyment of their social protection rights.
► Crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic intensify inequality for women and girls, particularly those who are
already in a vulnerable situation such as migrants, displaced persons and refugees. In addition, many migrant
women are healthcare workers, domestic workers, community volunteers, logistics managers or scientists and,
as frontline workers, face increased exposure and risk. At the same time, their access to social protection and
healthcare may be limited, both legally and in practice, by increased discrimination against and stigmatization
of foreign nationals.

169

The prevalence of insurance schemes based on a male-breadwinner model is largely a result of the fact that women’s child-bearing and
-raising activities often remove them from the workforce for extended periods of time and that, once they re-enter the labour market,
they are more likely than men to take up part-time employment. Although this has been changing over the past few decades, the malebreadwinner model is still common in more conservative countries that follow a patriarchal family model, including those from which
many migrants originate (Fitzpatrick et al. 2006).

170

Social protection floors are “nationally-defined sets of basic social security guarantees which secure protection aimed at preventing or
alleviating poverty, vulnerability and social exclusion. These guarantees should ensure at a minimum that, over the life cycle, all in need
have access to essential health care and basic income security” (ILO 2012).

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

►8.1 Introduction
In 2019, there were an estimated 169 million migrant
workers worldwide, including 99 million men and
70 million women (ILO 2021). While both sexes
emigrate from their countries of origin for similar
reasons (seeking an education, better job opportunities and decent working conditions), migration is
often a gendered experience that is affected not only
by gender norms and expectations, but also by power
relations and unequal rights which, combined, shape
the migration options and experiences of women and
girls, but also of men and boys (ODI 2016).
Yet although their motivation may be similar, the
obstacles that they face during the migration cycle and
their opportunities in their countries of destination
differ. Migrant women and girls often have less
information, a lower level of education and fewer
options for regular migration than men and this places
them at higher risk of exploitation and abuse, including
trafficking and forced labour (UNFPA 2015).
Once they have arrived in their destination countries,
these obstacles, together with potential cultural norms
and expectations, make women more likely than
men to work in precarious and informal jobs, carry a
heavier burden of unpaid care and face interruptions
and inequalities in paid work. Taken together, these
factors heighten the challenge for women migrant
workers in their effort to access social protection (ILO
and UNWomen 2015b).
While these inequalities also exist for national women,
they are amplified for women migrants given the
intersectionality of barriers based on a number of
additional characteristics that do not apply to national
workers.171 Yet although their experiences may vary,
the vulnerabilities caused by gender-discriminatory
practices accumulate for all women over their life cycle,
increasing their vulnerability in old age and resulting
in social protection gaps (SPIAC-B 2019; ILO and
UNWomen 2015b).

Unfortunately, these vulnerabilities can only be
addressed to a certain extent by today’s migration
governance, which is largely gender-blind and
overlooks the ways in which gender and its various
forms of intersectionality, particularly the gendered
realities and risks faced by women, shape migration
(Hennebry and Petrozziello 2019). A gender-neutral
approach to migration policy ignores the power
dynamics and implications of socio-economic and
socio-cultural structures and definitions at home,
abroad172 and in gender-segregated labour markets173
(Piper 2006).
Gender plays an important role in labour migration.
Cultural norms and the political will to address gender
inequalities are crucial to equality of opportunity for all,
independently of gender identities and their intersectionality. Understanding the ways in which women and
men are, in practice, differently affected with regard
to employment and social protection abroad requires
an examination of women’s migration from a gender
inequalities perspective (CEDAW 2008) and an acknowledgement that gender is situated on a spectrum and
is not restricted to the dichotomy between men and
women. Such an assessment of gender differences
can and should feed into social protection policymaking, enhancing awareness and understanding of
gender gaps and experience with social protection and
migration with a view to the design and implementation
of more gender-responsive strategies and schemes
aimed at increasing migrant workers’ enjoyment of
their social protection rights.
This chapter will provide a preliminary overview of
the interplay between gender, migration and social
protection. While acknowledging the importance of
gender diversity in this regard, it also recognizes the
limitations of the available studies and instruments as
a means of addressing the spectrum of gender realities
in the context of migration and social protection.

171

Intersectionality is a theoretical framework for understanding how characteristics of an individual’s social and political identity (such
as gender, sex, race, ethnicity, class, sexual orientation, religion, disability, age, physical appearance, height and employment status)
combine to create different forms of discrimination and privilege (Runyan 2018). It highlights the importance of developing laws, policies
and schemes that allow for flexibility in order not to unintentionally exclude people who do not fit into fixed categories.

172

Gender is a social category and its definitions are determined by the cultural and economic structures of society; people are assigned
expected attributes, behaviour, and responsibilities based on their gender. In traditional patriarchal societies, men hold most positions of
power while women are consigned to domestic and reproductive roles. In contrast, societies in Europe and North America are increasingly
moving towards greater gender equality; socio-cultural structures are transforming and there is growing acceptance of women’s place
in the labour market and in positions of power. This transformation is accompanied by a move away from the male bread-winner model
of society to one in which women can be their households’ sole earners.

173

This refers to the distribution of workers across and within occupations in the labour market based on the demographic characteristic of
gender.

201

202

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

With this in mind, the chapter will begin with an
overview of the migration experience from a gender
perspective, including trends, concepts and real-life
examples. It will then present the international
standards and instruments – including UN Conventions
and ILO standards – with gender-responsive provisions
on social protection for migrant workers; the obstacles

and challenges faced by migrants, particularly
women; the available policy options for addressing
gender-specific vulnerabilities and inequalities; and
complementary measures that can be used to address
the practical barriers that hinder effective access to
gender-responsive social protection, followed by a
conclusion and recommendations.

► Box 8.1 Key concepts
Sex is a biological trait that is determined by the specific sex chromosomes inherited from one’s parents.
(Conger 2017).
Gender refers to the social attributes and opportunities associated with being male and female and the
relationships between women and men and girls and boys and the relations between women and those
between men. These attributes, opportunities and relationships are socially constructed and are learned
through socialization processes. They are context/time-specific and changeable. Gender determines what
is expected, allowed and valued in a woman or a man in a given context. In most societies, there are differences and inequalities between women and men in responsibilities assigned, activities undertaken, access
to and control over resources and decision-making opportunities. Gender is part of the broader socio-cultural context. Other important criteria for socio-cultural analysis include class, race, poverty level, ethnic
group and age. (UNWomen n.d.)
Equality between women and men (gender equality) refers to the equal rights, responsibilities and opportunities of women and men and girls and boys. Equality does not mean that women and men will become the
same but that women’s and men’s rights, responsibilities and opportunities will not depend on whether
they are born male or female. Gender equality implies that the interests, needs and priorities of both
women and men are taken into consideration, recognizing the diversity of different groups of women and
men. Gender equality is not a women’s issue but should concern and fully engage men as well as women.
Equality between women and men is seen both as a human rights issue and as a precondition for, and
indicator of, sustainable people-centred development (UNWomen n.d.).
Gender mainstreaming is the systematic consideration of the differences between the conditions, situations
and needs of women and men in all policies and actions. It has been embraced internationally as a strategy
towards realising gender equality. It involves the integration of a gender perspective into the preparation,
design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies, regulatory measures and spending
programmes, with a view to promoting equality between women and men, and combating discrimination.
(Europe Institute for Gender Equality 2020).

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

►8.2 Concepts and trends: the
experience of migration from a
gender perspective
Men and women migrate for similar reasons in search
of, among other things, an education, better job
opportunities and decent working conditions. However,
migration is a gendered experience that is affected by
gender norms and expectations, power relations and
unequal rights and this shapes the migration options
and experiences of women and girls, but also men and
boys (ODI 2016). Gender norms affect when and why
people migrate.
Gender norms can restrict women’s and girl’s
migration; they have less control than men over the
decision to migrate, which is sometimes taken by
their families on their behalf (Yeoh, Graham and Boyle
2002; Shaw 2005). However, some adolescent girls
and women migrate in order to escape family control
or harmful practices such as forced or early marriage
(Temin, Montgomery, Engebretsen and Barker 2013).
The fact that women migrants often have less
information, a lower level of education and fewer
options for regular migration than men places them
at higher risk of exploitation and abuse, including
trafficking and forced labour (UNFPA 2015). As migrant
workers, they are less able to rely on networks and social
capital for support. Moreover, women migrants tend
to be more risk-averse than men, favouring migration
through regular channels with social networks in place
wherever possible (ODI 2016).
► Less information: There are differences in the
networks and social capital available to migrant
men and women. While men tend to obtain information from a wider group of family and friends,
women tend to focus on their immediate family.
Women are also more likely to migrate for reasons
other than employment, such as family reunification or humanitarian considerations (ILO 2018a),
and are therefore more likely to be dependent on
a man in the country of destination; this, together
with language barriers, may also limit their
access to information. As they are generally less
well informed about labour market conditions in
the country of destination, women migrants are
exposed to certain dangers, including human trafficking, abuse and forced labour.
► Lower levels of education: Social stigma,
resource constraints, institutions and discrimination lead to lower educational investment in
and achievement by women, and consequently

to reduced earnings, fewer job opportunities
and lower labour force participation rates when
compared with men. Taken together, these factors
force a high proportion of women, especially
migrants, into the informal economy with few or
no social protection rights. Even when jobs are
available, women, and especially migrant women,
are more likely to be overqualified for a position,
leading to a phenomenon known as “deskilling”.
Weak regulations may also allow employers to pay
women, especially migrant women, lower wages
while subjecting them to long working hours and
exploitative working conditions (Abdulloev, Gang
and Yun 2014).
► Fewer options for regular migration: Because
women tend to be more risk-averse than their
male counterparts and prefer to migrate through
regular channels and with social networks in place,
their limited access to information and lower
level of education leaves them with fewer options
for regular migration. Economic circumstances
and the need to survive force many of them into
irregular migration pathways and place them at
higher risk of violence, trafficking and exploitation
(ODI 2016).
Gender and social norms in their countries of origin
and destination influence the outcomes of migration
for migrant workers, especially women and girls.
Migration can be empowering for women as it can
increase their autonomy, improve their self-esteem
and social standing and allow them to acquire new skills
and send remittances back home, thus transforming
power dynamics within families and communities
(ODI 2016). In countries of both origin and destination,
women migrant workers fill labour shortages and
contribute to socio-economic development, skills
transfer and innovation. These changing dynamics can
also lead communities to adopt more equitable norms
on matters such as education, division of labour and
gender roles. However, some women migrants who
return home with new skills and attitudes face stigma
and resistance that make it hard for them to reintegrate
into their families and communities (Sijapati 2015).
Global demand for labour, which influences migration
patterns, is often defined by gender stereotypes: most
employment opportunities for women migrants are
low-skilled jobs, predominantly in informal, unregulated sectors such as agriculture, domestic work and
the service and sex industries (OHCHR-UNWomen
2016). Women migrants are highly concentrated in
devalued, gendered and invisible and/or isolated
labour sectors in which labour, physical and psychological abuse and sexual violence are common (IOM

203

204

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

2017). The demand for women migrants in destination
countries, especially in the domestic work and
care sectors, reinforces stereotypes that limit their
autonomy and decision-making power and leave them
vulnerable to gender-based violence and systemic
abuse of their human rights (UNWomen 2015a). Some
governments, such as those of Cambodia, Ethiopia,
Indonesia, Madagascar, Malaysia, Myanmar and
Nepal, have banned migration to certain destination
countries that are considered high-risk (Napier-Moore
2017; Hennebry and Petrozziello 2019). In some cases,
however, this has merely increased irregular migration
to these countries at the expense of the very migrants
that the ban sought to protect and has led the Governments of Ethiopia, Nepal and, most recently, Indonesia,
to reverse their decision.
► Until 2018, Ethiopia banned the employment of its
nationals in Gulf countries. Yet, owing to the lack
of employment opportunities in the country, many
migrants left in an irregular manner, increasing
their risk of human trafficking and employer-based exploitation in the destination country;
an estimated 1,000 Ethiopian women per day
were emigrating in order to seek employment
abroad with Saudi Arabia the most common destination. In 2018, the Government lifted the ban and
enforced new legislation in an effort to protect
its citizens from mistreatment through regulations governing recruitment agents, minimum age
and education requirements and pre-departure
training. Yet even with this new legislation, challenges are anticipated and since many of the country’s citizens cannot meet the eligibility criteria,
informal migration pathways may persist (Walk
Free Foundation 2019).
► The ban on migration to the Middle East imposed
by the Government of Indonesia in 2015 was lifted
in 2020. It initially prohibited women from travelling to the region as domestic workers owing to

174

accounts of abuse and torture in the countries of
destination. However, since roughly 5,000-10,000
low-skilled workers per month were migrating
illegally to these countries, the Government lifted
the ban and has been working to formalize this
stream of workers. The rights to be established in
the new migration plan include maximum limits on
working hours and a prohibition of residence in an
employer’s home (Ganesha 2018).
In the context of labour migration, lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) 174 persons
may face an extra layer of discrimination based on
gender or sexual orientation, often compounded by
nationality, race, ethnicity and migration status, which
has a significant influence on their working and living
conditions. These workers face multiple barriers to the
exercise of many of their rights, including the right to
social protection.
Examples:
► LGBTI persons may experience obstacles when
trying to access healthcare owing to “mistrust
between patients and doctors, problematic attitudes of medical staff and outdated approaches to
homosexuality and transgenderism” (UNDP 2011).
► They also face discrimination and harassment
on the labour market owing to gender-blind
employment policies and laws that do not take
non-binary individuals into account. LGBTI
workers may also experience unequal treatment
with regard to “appraisals, performance
pressure, training opportunities, salary or
holiday benefits” (UNDP 2011). Furthermore,
partners in a same-sex relationship/partnership
may not be entitled to benefits such as parental
leave, healthcare insurance and education for
their families, caregivers’ allowances and death
benefits.

“The terms lesbian, gay, bisexual and pansexual refer to people’s sexual orientation, that is, who they experience sexual attraction
towards; while transgender refers to gender identity, that is, ‘someone whose gender differs from the one they were given when they
were born’. Terms like genderqueer and non-binary refer to people who fall outside the construction of gender as male or female. Intersex
people are born with physical or biological sex characteristics such as reproductive or sexual anatomy, hormones or chromosomes that
do not seem to fit the typical definitions of female or male” (UNRISD et al. n.d.).

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

►8.3 International standards and
instruments that promote genderresponsive social protection of
migrant workers
8.3.1 Key UN Conventions
In order to combat these forms of discrimination,
several international standards and instruments
establish the right to gender-responsive social
protection. Article 1(3) of the Charter of the United
Nations states that one of the Purposes of the UN is “[t]
o achieve international co-operation in […] promoting
and encouraging respect for human rights and for
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language, or religion”.

The United Nations has been working on the
issue of women’s rights almost since its founding.
Within the Organization’s first year, on 21 June
1946, the Economic and Social Council established
its Commission on the Status of Women, as the
principal global policy-making body dedicated
exclusively to gender equality and advancement
of women. Among its earliest accomplishments
was ensuring gender neutral language in the draft
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. (UN 1995).
From then onwards, the international feminist
movement gained momentum, leading to the adoption
of various UN conventions:

► Table 8.1 Key UN Conventions with provisions on gender-responsive social protection for migrant
workers
International
Convention on the
Protection of the
Rights of all Migrant
Workers and Members
of their Families, 1990

The Convention is applicable “[…] to all migrant workers and members of their families
without distinction of any kind such as sex, […] marital status […] or other status” […] during
the entire migration process […] (Art. 1).
“With respect to social security, migrant workers and members of their families shall enjoy
in the State of employment the same treatment granted to nationals in so far as they fulfil
the requirements provided for by the applicable legislation of that State and the applicable
bilateral and multilateral treaties” (Art. 27). Thus, national authorities determine whether
(and which) migrants meet these requirements. However, the Convention also provides that
reimbursement of contributions should be considered where migrants are denied benefits.
The Convention states that “[m]igrant workers and their families shall have the right to receive
any medical care that is urgently required […]” (Art. 28).
As at April 2021, 56 countries have ratified this Convention.

UN Convention on
the Elimination
of All Forms of
Discrimination against
Women, 1979 (entry
into force 1981)

The Convention is often described as the International Bill of Rights for Women. It provides that
“States parties shall “[…] eliminate discrimination against women in the field of employment
in order to ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women, the same rights, in particular:
[…] the right to social security, particularly in cases of retirement, unemployment, sickness,
invalidity and old age and other incapacity to work and the right to paid leave; […]” (Art. 11). It
also states that States parties shall take “all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination
against women in the field of healthcare in order to ensure […] access to healthcare services,
including those related to family planning” (Art. 12).
In its General Recommendation No. 26 (2008) on Women Migrant Workers, the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women considers that States parties should “require
prospective employers to purchase medical insurance for women migrant workers” (para. 24
(d)); and should “design or oversee comprehensive socio-economic, psychological and legal
services aimed at facilitating the reintegration of women who have returned” (para. 24 (i)).
As at April 2021, 189 countries have ratified this Convention.

205

206

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

8.3.2 Key international labour
standards
States’ obligation to provide social protection to
all, including migrant workers, is established in the
ILO Constitution (1919) and in the Declaration of
Philadelphia (1944). The Declaration affirms that “all
human beings, irrespective of race, creed or sex, have
the right to pursue both their material well-being and
their spiritual development in conditions of freedom of
dignity, of economic security and equal opportunity”
(Art. II(a)). The ILO’s 2008 Declaration on Social
Justice for a Fair Globalization reaffirms the Organization’s constitutional mandate and institutionalizes
the 1999 Decent Work Agenda and its four strategic
objectives, including the extension of social security
to all, with gender equality and non-discrimination as
cross-cutting issues. In 2019, the International Labour
Conference adopted the Centenary Declaration for the

Future of Work (ILO 2019a), which states that the ILO
must direct its efforts towards, among other things,
‘’achieving gender equality at work through a transformative agenda’’ and “deepening and scaling up its
work on international labour migration in response
to constituents’ needs and taking a leadership role in
decent work in labour migration’’ (sect. II(A)(vii)) and
(xvi)). The Declaration calls on member States, with
the support of the ILO, to work towards ‘’the effective
realization of gender equality in opportunities and
treatment’’ (sect. III(A)(I)).
The ILO’s Multilateral Framework on Labour Migration
(2006) states that “[a]ll international labour standards
apply to migrant workers, unless otherwise stated”
(para. 9(a)) and refers consistently to “men and women
migrant workers”. Similarly, all international labour
standards apply to both men and women workers,
unless otherwise stated. Many international labour
standards are relevant to gender and migration issues.

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

► Table 8.2 Key ILO Conventions and Recommendations with a view to gender-responsive social
protection for migrant workers
Violence and
Harassment
Convention,
2019 (No. 190)
and Violence
and Harassment
Recommendation,
2019 (No. 206)

The Convention recognizes “the right of everyone to a world of work free from
violence and harassment, including gender-based violence and harassment”. In its
Preamble, it expressly recalls the relevant international instruments, including those
on migrant workers and their families. The Convention calls on States parties to
ensure that “violence and harassment in the world of work is addressed in relevant
national policies, such as those concerning occupational safety and health, equality
and non-discrimination and migration” (Art. 11; emphasis added). Similarly, the
Violence and Harassment Recommendation states that “[m]embers should take
legislative or other measures to protect migrant workers, particularly women
migrant workers, regardless of migrant status, in origin, transit and destination
countries as appropriate, from violence and harassment in the world of work” (para.
10; emphasis added).
The Convention’s focus on inclusivity is essential; it establishes that everyone who
works must be protected, irrespective of contractual status, including interns,
volunteers, job applicants and persons exercising the authority of an employer. It
applies to the public and private sectors, the formal and informal economies and
urban and rural areas. Some groups and workers in specific sectors, occupations
and work arrangements – for example, healthcare, transport, education, domestic
work and work at night or in isolated areas – are acknowledged to be especially
vulnerable to violence and harassment. The sectors specific to each country are to
be identified through tripartite consultations.
The impact of domestic violence on the world of work is also included in the
Recommendation. Paragraph 23 states:
Members should fund, develop, implement and disseminate, as appropriate: […]
(d) public awareness-raising campaigns in the various languages of the country,
including those of the migrant workers residing in the country, that convey the
unacceptability of violence and harassment, in particular gender-based violence and
harassment, address discriminatory attitudes and prevent stigmatization of victims,
complainants, witnesses and whistle-blowers (emphasis added).
This is a significant step in bringing domestic violence out of the shadows and
changing attitudes towards it. The Recommendation also calls for practical measures,
including leave for victims, flexible work arrangements and awareness-raising.

Employment
and Decent
Work for Peace
and Resilience
Recommendation,
2017 (No. 205)

The Recommendation includes a section on guiding principles (II) that promote
equality of opportunity and treatment for women and men without discrimination
of any kind. It also includes a specific section (V) on rights, equality and nondiscrimination:
15. In responding to discrimination arising from or exacerbated by conflicts or
disasters and when taking measures for promoting peace, preventing crises,
enabling recovery and building resilience, Members should:
(a) respect, promote and realize equality of opportunity and treatment for women
and men without discrimination of any kind […].
Particular attention should be paid to population groups and individuals who have
been made even more vulnerable by the crisis, including but not limited to migrants
and refugees. This Recommendation has proved to be of particular importance in
light of the current Covid-19 pandemic.

207

208

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Transition from
the Informal to the
Formal Economy
Recommendation,
2015 (No. 204)

By addressing women’s overrepresentation in informal work, the Recommendation
promotes reducing coverage gaps and strengthening the sustainability and financing
base of social protection systems. Governments should support the transition to the
formal economy by, among other things, establishing legal and policy frameworks,
creating sustainable decent jobs in the formal sector as part of comprehensive
employment policies, extending social protection, providing incentives for the
transition to formal work, improving access to finance, simplifying procedures for
registering businesses, enforcing labour laws and workplace regulations, collecting
data and supporting freedom of association and social dialogue.
7. In designing formalization strategies, States should take into account the
following:
[…]
(h) the promotion of gender equality and non-discrimination;
(i) the need to pay special attention to those who are especially vulnerable to
the most serious decent work deficits in the informal economy, including but not
limited to women, young people, migrants, older people, indigenous and tribal
peoples, persons living with HIV or affected by HIV, persons with disabilities,
domestic workers and subsistence farmers (para. 7 (h) and (i); emphasis added).
In order to facilitate formalization, they should also ensure that national
development plans, strategies and budgets include an integrated policy framework
that addresses: “the promotion of equality and the elimination of all forms of
discrimination and violence, including gender-based violence, at the workplace”,
and “the establishment of social protection floors, where they do not exist, and the
extension of social security coverage” (para. 11 (f) and (n); emphasis added).
Employment policies should include social protection schemes, including cash
transfers, public employment programmes and guarantees, labour migration
policies that promote decent work and measures to promote the transition from
unemployment and inactivity to work, in particular for long-term unemployed
persons, women and other disadvantaged groups (para. 15; emphasis added).
With respect to social protection, the Recommendation expressly provides that
States should progressively extend social security and maternity protection to all
workers in the informal economy and should “encourage the provision of access
and affordable quality childcare and other care services in order to promote gender
equality in entrepreneurship and employment opportunities and to enable the
transition to the formal economy” (para. 21; emphasis added).

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

Social Protection
Floors
Recommendation,
2012 (No. 202).

Recommendation No. 202 states: “Subject to their international obligations,
Members should provide basic social security guarantees […] to at least all residents
and children, as defined in national laws and regulations” (para. 6), thus covering
the children of migrants in an irregular situation.
It also recommends that States:
(a) establish and maintain, as applicable, social protection floors as a fundamental
element of their national social security systems; and
(b) implement social protection floors within strategies for the extension of social
security that progressively ensure higher levels of social security to as many
people as possible, guided by ILO social security standards” (para.1).
The Recommendation comprises a set of principles which are particularly relevant
to efforts to address the social protection gender gap and inequalities in access to
social protection: “universality of protection based on social solidarity” (para. 3 (a));
(“non-discrimination, gender equality and responsiveness to special needs” (para.
3 (d)); and “social inclusion, including persons in the informal economy” (para. (e)).
SPFs should ensure, at a minimum, access to essential healthcare, including maternity
care and basic income security for children; persons in active age who are unable to
earn sufficient income for reasons such as sickness, unemployment, maternity and
disability; and older persons (para. 5). They should provide basic social protection
guarantees for all in need and effective access to goods and services throughout
their life cycle (para. 4), taking into account the particular risks that women may face
throughout their lives.
When defining basic social security guarantees, the States should give due
consideration to, among other things, “free prenatal and postnatal medical care
for the most vulnerable” (para. 8 (a)). With respect to national strategies for the
extension of social security, “social security extension strategies should apply to
persons both in the formal and informal economy and support the growth of formal
employment and the reduction of informality” (para. 15).

Domestic Workers
Convention, 2011
(No. 189) and
Recommendation,
2011 (No. 201)

Convention No. 189 offers specific protection to domestic workers. It establishes
basic rights and principles and requires States to take a series of measures to make
decent work a reality for domestic workers. Including migrant domestic workers:
“Each Member shall take appropriate measures, in accordance with national laws
and regulations and with due regard for the specific characteristics of domestic
work, to ensure that domestic workers enjoy conditions that are not less favourable
than those applicable to workers generally in respect of social security protection,
including with respect to maternity” (art. 14(1)).
The Recommendation states:
(1) Members should consider, in accordance with national laws and regulations,
means to facilitate the payment of social security contributions, including in
respect of domestic workers working for multiple employers, for example through
a system of simplified payment.
(2) Members should consider concluding bilateral, regional or multilateral
agreements to provide, for migrant domestic workers covered by such
agreements, equality of treatment in respect of social security and access to and
preservation or portability of social security entitlements.
(3) The monetary value of payments in kind should be duly considered for social
security purposes, including in respect of the contribution by the employers and
the entitlements of the domestic workers (para. 20).

209

210

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Maternity
Protection
Convention, 2000
(No. 183); Maternity
Protection
Recommendation,
2000 (No. 191)

The Convention establishes that the period of maternity leave should be not less
than 14 weeks and that cash benefits (at least two-thirds of previous earnings or
a comparable amount) should be provided to ensure that women can maintain
themselves and their children in proper conditions of health and with a suitable
standard of living. Women and children should receive medical benefits, including
prenatal, childbirth and postnatal care and, where necessary, hospitalization.

Maintenance of
Social Security
Rights Convention,
1982 (No. 157);
Maintenance
of Social
Security Rights
Recommendation,
1983 (No. 167)

The Convention seeks to ensure the portability of rights and benefits. A model social
security agreement is provided in annex to the Recommendation.

Workers
with Family
Responsibilities
Convention, 1981
(No. 156); Workers
with Family
Responsibilities
Recommendation,
1981 (No. 165)

The Convention and Recommendation stress that persons with family responsibilities
must be free to exercise their right to employment without discrimination:

Migrant Workers
(Supplementary
Provisions)
Convention, 1975
(No. 143)

The Convention is divided into two parts, which can be ratified independently of
each other. Part I calls on Members to respect the basic human rights of all migrant
workers, including those in an irregular situation: “On condition that he has resided
legally in the territory for purposes of employment, the migrant worker shall not be
regarded as illegal or irregular situation by the mere fact of loss of employment […]”
(Art. 8). Even

The Recommendation calls for, among other things, at least 18 weeks of maternity
leave.

With a view to creating effective equality of opportunity and treatment for men
and women workers, all measures compatible with national conditions and
possibilities shall be taken […] (b) to take account of their needs in terms and
conditions of employment and in social security” (Art. 4) “to develop or promote
community services, public or private, such as child-care and family services and
facilities (Art. 5(b)).

in cases where the relevant laws and regulations have not been respected and in
which his position cannot be regularized, the migrant worker shall enjoy equality
of treatment for himself and his family in respect of rights arising out of past
employment as regards remuneration, social security and other benefits (Art. 9).
Part II mandates opportunity and treatment for migrant workers in a regular
situation, including with respect to social security (Art. 10).
Equality of
Treatment
(Social Security)
Convention, 1962
(No. 118)

The Convention mandates equal treatment with respect to social security between a
country’s nationals and nationals of other States in which the Convention is in force.

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

ILO Social Security
(Minimum
Standards)
Convention, 1952
(No. 102)

The Convention provides for equality of treatment between national and nonnational residents. Its application may, however, require the existence of a bilateral
or multilateral agreement (Art. 68(2)).

Discrimination
(Employment
and Occupation)
Convention, 1958
(No. 111)

This is one of the eight fundamental ILO Conventions and is a key instrument for
gender equality. Irrespective of whether ILO members States have ratified these
fundamental Conventions, by adopting the 1998 Declaration on Fundamental
Principles and Rights at Work they assumed the obligation to give progressive effect
to the values established therein and to submit annual reports on the status of these
fundamental rights in their countries (ILO 2019c).
The Convention seeks to promote equality of opportunity and treatment in respect
of employment and occupation with a view to eliminating discrimination on the basis
of race, colour, sex, religion, national extraction, political opinion and social origin.
The Recommendation states:
With respect to immigrant workers of foreign nationality and the members of their
families, regard should be had to the provisions of the Migration for Employment
Convention (Revised), 1949, relating to equality of treatment and the provisions of
the Migration for Employment Recommendation (Revised), 1949, relating to the
lifting of restrictions on access to employment (para. 8; emphasis added).

Migration for
Employment
Convention
(Revised), 1949 (No.
97)

States parties to the Convention undertake “to apply, without discrimination in
respect of nationality, race, religion or sex, to immigrants lawfully within its territory
treatment no less favourable than that which it applies to its own nationals, in respect
of […] (b) social security [...]”, subject to certain limitations (Art. 6; emphasis added).

8.3.3 Complementary international
agendas
Social protection is also a fundamental aspect of the
SDGs. Goals 1 (on ending poverty), 3 (on good health
and well-being), 5 (on gender equality) (Box 8.2) and
10 (on reducing inequalities) have targets of relevance
to social protection while Goals 5, 8 (on growth and
decent work), 10, 16 (on peaceful, inclusive societies
and access to justice for all) and 17 (on global partnerships on sustainable development) have targets of
relevance to migration.

Gender components are central to both the ILO’s
Decent Work Agenda and the UN’s 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which are essential in
ensuring fair access to social protection.

211

212

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Box 8.2 SDG Goal 5 – Gender equality
Goal 5 of the SDGs seeks to end all forms of discrimination against women and girls. Freedom from
discrimination is a basic human right and, in view of the role of women and girls in economic growth and
development, is crucial to a sustainable future. This Goal has nine specific targets:
Target 5.1 – End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls everywhere.
Target 5.2 – Eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres,
including trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation.
Target 5.3 – Eliminate all harmful practices, such as child, early and forced marriage and female genital
mutilation.
Target 5.4 – Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public services,
infrastructure and social protection policies and promotion of shred responsibility within the household and
the family as nationally appropriate.
Target 5.5 – Ensure women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all
levels of decision-making in political, economic and public life.
Target 5.6 – Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights as agreed in
accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development
and the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome documents of their review conferences.
Target 5.a – Undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources as well as access to
ownership and control over land and other forms of property, financial services, inheritance and natural
resources, in accordance with national laws.
Target 5.b – Enhance the use of enabling technology, in particular information and communications
technology, to promote the empowerment of women.
Target 5.c – Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.
Although significant progress has been achieved across the globe, these targets have yet to be fully met.
Yet, especially for migrant women and girls, this goal and its accompanying targets are vital in view of the
challenges faced. These include, among others, violence at all stages of the migration process; exposure to
different social norms and practices (such as female genital mutilation) as a result of migration; undervaluation of migrant domestic work and unpaid care, fields in which close to three quarters of the workforce
are women; confinement of women migrants to “feminine” jobs (such as live-in care and domestic work)
in the country of destination; the risk of forced labour, trafficking and exploitation and abuse; and failure to
enforce their labour rights.
Source: UN n.d.; O’Neil, Fleury and Foresti 2016

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

►8.4 Gender gaps in social
protection: Obstacles and
challenges
Gender gaps in access to social protection arise from
the gendered characteristics of the labour market and
the structure of the social security system, including
social protection and the public services infrastructure.
Globally, this system is not gender-neutral; it burdens
women and girls with inequality and stereotypes
about the division of labour (GAATW 2019).175 Non-gender-neutral schemes have a tendency to penalize
women.
All too often, women are disadvantaged under social
protection systems by lower coverage rates and
substantially lower benefit levels (UNWomen 2015b)
and are paid less than men for work of equal value.
This gender pay gap leads to reduced contributions,

and thus to lower benefit levels in many cases (ILO
forthcoming). Women’s generally have a lower rate
of labour force participation176 and greater representation in the informal economy (particularly in the case
of women migrant workers), together with gendered
employment patterns,177 result in lower social security
coverage rates (ILO 2018a; Bilecen et al. 2019).
Women are also less likely to benefit from coverage
under contributory social security schemes, which are
usually linked to formal employment (Tessier et al.
2013). Informality limits workers’ ability to meet the
qualifying conditions for social insurance schemes178
and thus leaves women particularly vulnerable,
especially in old age (Box 8.3). It also subjects women
migrant workers to compounded layers of discrimination. In the absence of an SPF, women are often left
without old-age pensions, unemployment benefits
and maternity protection (ILO 2016).179 For example,

► Box 8.3 Women and old-age poverty
Women in old age tend to face a significantly higher risk of poverty and/or social exclusion than men. This
inequality is characteristic of both the formal and the informal economy.
Women who have worked in the formal economy and have contributed to a pension scheme have a lower
average pension income than men, often substantially so. These gaps in pension income reflect the gender
gaps in remuneration, working hours and the duration of working life. Differences in wages may be rooted in
the underlying variation of education and skill levels and in gender discrimination. In addition, the statutory
pension age may be lower for women than for men, resulting in shorter contribution periods and, as a
result, lower pension benefits. An additional hurdle that migrant women may face is the absence of a social
security agreement ensuring the portability of pension benefits across borders, or of unilateral measures
authorizing the exportability of acquired pension benefits.
The risk of old-age poverty is higher in the informal than in the formal economy. As women, and especially
migrant women, are overrepresented in this sector and as the informal economy is characterized by a lack
of social protection, they largely depend on the provision of social assistance although even these provisions
are lacking or limited in many countries. Thus, in order to survive, women are forced to work for as long as
they are physically able. However, the low wages paid in the informal economy, the lack of a social pension
and their limited savings forces many of them into poverty in their old age. For women migrant workers who
return to spend the rest of their days in their countries of origin after many years of work in the informal
economy, an SPF is essential.

175

The term “gender roles” has been defined as “a cultural and social approach towards the very thing that is traditionally considered being
‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ roles and functions” (Kiaušienė, Štreimikienė, and Grundey 2011, p. 84). These stereotypes include the belief
that women possess poorer abilities and are less able than men to perform work that requires responsibility. Such stereotypes often
influence men’s and women’s choice of employment and, as such, create a labour market that is divided by gender.

176

On average, their labour participation is 26 percentage points lower than that of men (ITUC 2018).

177

Gendered employment patterns are patterns across occupations that are usually dominated by women or men. For example, public
relations, nursing, and teaching are usually considered female-gendered occupations whereas stock trading, construction and
engineering are considered male-gendered (Doering and Thébaud 2017).

178

Social insurance schemes are state-led contributory schemes that protect beneficiaries from certain risks and catastrophic expenses. In
recent years, there has been a trend towards the extension of these schemes to the informal economy, including in Brazil, Chile, China,
Ghana, Rwanda, South Africa and Viet Nam (Holmes and Scott 2016).

179

Globally, only 26.4 per cent of working-age women are covered by contributory old-age protection schemes as compared to 31.5 per cent
of the total working-age population. Gender gaps in social protection tend to be especially acute for older persons; almost 65 per cent of
people above the retirement age without a regular pension are women. This places women at a substantially higher risk of poverty than
men, particularly as their average lifespan is longer. In the EU, 20.6 per cent of women over 65, as compared to 15 per cent of men, are
at risk of poverty and in some countries, such as Bulgaria, the difference between men and women is over 15 percentage points.

213

214

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

► Box 8.4 The burden of unpaid care work
Globally, women spend two to ten times as much time as men on unpaid care work owing to gendered
social norms that view unpaid care work as their responsibility (Ferrant, Pesando and Nowacka 2014). This,
in addition to their paid activities, often places a double burden of work on women, especially migrants, as
socio-economic, demographic and environmental transformation increases the demand for care workers. In
fact, “across regions, sectors and occupations, migrant care workers are mainly women engaged by private
households, in informal settings, working in the informal economy without full access to social protection
and basic labour rights” (King-Dejardin 2019). Many of these workers migrate under temporary schemes,
leaving their own families in the care of other family members or domestic workers. This creates “global
care chains” under which inequality persists since many national policies do not address unpaid care work.
Countries should ensure a more equal distribution of this work through flexible working schedules, shared
parental leave and the extension of social protection to women, especially migrant women, through SPFs.

domestic workers are often excluded under national
social security legislation and, when employed
informally, have no access to social protection or
coverage under the labour laws (UNDESA 2018).
In many countries, social insurance schemes are
designed around a male-breadwinner model based on
uninterrupted, full-time work in the formal economy.180
In the informal economy, women depend on non-contributory social transfers, whether cash or in-kind,
which are usually sent to households or to one member
of the household (in the case of social pensions or child
benefits), without taking into account the gender and
social relations within the household and their effect
on intra-household distribution of income (Devereux
2012; Holmes and Jones 2013). This can result in
further challenges for women; for example, where a
child benefit is paid in cash to the woman caregiver in
a household, tension may arise between her and the
male breadwinner and financial decision-maker and
can even, in extreme cases, lead to domestic violence
(Holmes and Jones 2010).
All of these factors contribute to a significant gender
gap in social protection and levels of social security
benefits. Moreover, it should be borne in mind that
migrant workers also face other forms of discrimination in access to social protection systems. Women
migrants, in particular, are at greater risk of exploitation,
sexual violence and trafficking throughout their
migration cycle. This creates a vicious circle, especially
for migrant women in an irregular situation, as these
risk factors make them more likely to require access to
health protection, including the treatment of mental
health problems for which they do not qualify in many
countries.

Social protection schemes and more comprehensive
social security systems that are designed, implemented
and monitored in a gender-responsive manner
can increase women’s economic empowerment
and promote gender equality, while gender-blind
schemes and systems perpetuate and may even
exacerbate unequal gender relations (Tessier et al.
2013). For instance, in gender-blind social assistance
programmes, the burden of conditionality181 tends
to fall disproportionately on women owing to the
programme’s design or because these women are, de
facto, the primary caregivers within their households.
This exacerbates women’s “time poverty”, hindering
their ability to work and reinforcing traditional social
roles within the household (Tessier et al. 2013).
Gender-blind social protection models and the lack of
a social protection scheme or floor can also influence
migration patterns. In countries of origin, the absence
of social protection, and particularly of child allowances,
old-age pensions and affordable healthcare, are
essential factors in women’s decision to migrate and
to provide for their family members who remain in the
country of origin (Torada Máñez, Lexartza Artza and
Martínez Franzoni 2012). In countries of destination,
migrant workers, particularly women domestic and
care workers, fill labour market needs and gaps in
social protection and public services (GAATW 2019).
Migration policies and regulations affect women and
men differently; for example, highly skilled migrant
women are still more likely than either migrant men
or non-migrant women to work in what are seen as
traditionally female-dominated occupations, including
domestic and care work (ILO 2015).

180

This places women at a disadvantage as they are more likely than men to have to interrupt their career or continue to work on a part-time
basis in order to care for their children and perform other household-related tasks. Furthermore, social security schemes, especially in
developing countries, do not always provide women with maternity benefits and employment protection.

181

“Conditionality” means requirements such as school attendance, regular health checks and participation in information sessions on
child-related issues.

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

► Box 8.5 The impact of COVID-19 on gender inequality
While pandemics such as COVID-19 affect everyone, they have a disproportionate impact on women and
girls owing to the health and social risks that they face as a result of “deeply entrenched inequalities, social
norms and unequal power relations” (UNDP 2020). In fact, situations such as a pandemic tend to intensify
these risks and associated inequalities for women and girls, particularly those who, like migrants, displaced
persons and refugees, are already in a vulnerable situation. The immediate effects of such crises on gender
inequality are seen in the areas of health, education, employment, gender-based violence and the burden
of unpaid care work.
Before the pandemic, a total of 1.3 billion women and 2 billion men (roughly 44 and 70 per cent of all women
and men, respectively, worldwide) were employed. Men are usually more disproportionately affected by
economic downturns than women because they tend to work in occupations that are closely linked to the
economic business cycle. However, the COVID-19 pandemic is not typical as “sectors overexposed to the
collapse in economic activity [have absorbed] a sizeable share of female employment” (ILO 2020b). The
four sectors at highest risk of job loss and decline in working hours are the food and accommodation, real
estate, business and administration, wholesale/retail and manufacturing sectors. In 2020, 41 per cent of
all women in the labour force – 6 percentage points higher than total male employment – were working
in these sectors (ILO 2020b). Moreover, many women in these sectors are self-employed or owners of
micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises with lower level of capitalization and greater reliance on self-financing.
Of the 740 million informal workers in these high-risk sectors, 310 million (42 per cent) are women, a
difference of ten percentage points. Lockdowns and restrictions have compounded the challenges faced
by informal workers, including access to social protection (such as healthcare, food support and maternity
benefits). This is especially detrimental to migrants as many of them, especially women, are employed in
the informal economy. In addition to legal restrictions on access to social protection and healthcare, these
workers also face increased discrimination and stigmatization, especially as foreign nationals. Women
migrant workers with irregular status may also be hesitant to comply with COVID-19 screening, testing and
treatment procedures owing to fear of documentation checks by authorities with potential fines, arrest,
detention and deportation (UNWomen 2020b).
Yet, despite these challenges and increased risks and fears, many women have kept their jobs as healthcare
workers, domestic workers, community volunteers, logistics managers, scientists and more. Depending
on their occupation, they are exposed to contracting COVID-19 to varying degrees. For example, migrant
domestic workers who care for children, the sick and older persons in a household setting are at higher
risk of contracting the virus and must cope with an increased workload in order to ensure cleanliness
and hygiene and provide the necessary care, often without personal protective equipment or overtime
compensation; these conditions are also faced by workers in the health and care sectors. Migrant workers’
exposure to discrimination, stigma, violence and harassment has increased as a result of COVID-19 (ILO
2020b) and unpaid women caregivers (representing two-thirds of the sector) have seen an increase in their
hours of work owing to school/day-care closures, reductions in public services for the disabled and older
persons, scarcity of domestic workers and the need to look after family members who have contracted the
virus.
Taken together, this demonstrates the need for continued dialogue with all parties concerned in order to
ensure that COVID-19 responses are effective and inclusive (ILO 2020b).

215

216

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

►8.5 Gender-responsive social
protection policies for migrant
workers: Policy options and
recommendations
The gender-specific vulnerabilities and inequalities
identified above can be addressed through various
public policies. Ensuring effective and equitable
access to social protection is key to the achievement
of gender equality. By providing public care services
and infrastructure, social protection systems can play
a significant role in redistributing care responsibilities and recognizing and valuing unpaid care and
domestic work (Tessier et al. 2013). Access to public
services and social protection systems is also critical in
ensuring migrant women’s enjoyment of their rights
and preventing trafficking (GAATW 2019).
The previous chapters have examined several policy
options for extending social protection to migrant
workers. For each of these policy options, specific
gender considerations should be taken into account in
order to ensure that social protection policies, schemes
and measures are gender-responsive.
► Ratification and application of international labour
standards
In addition to the relevant UN conventions, governments should consider ratifying and implementing the
following ILO Conventions and applying the relevant
Recommendations when considering migrant workers’
social protection rights through a gender lens:
► Equal Remuneration Convention, 1951 (No.
100);
► Discrimination (Employment and Occupation)
Convention, 1958 (No. 111);
► Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97);
► Migration for Employment Recommendation
(Revised), 1949 (No. 86);
► Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No. 118);
► Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions)
Convention, 1975 (No. 143);
► Migrant Workers Recommendation, 1975 (No.
151);
► Workers with Family Responsibilities Convention, 1981 (No. 156);

182

► Maternity Protection Convention, 2000 (No.
183);
► Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189);
► Domestic Workers Recommendation, 2011 (No.
201);
► Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019
(No. 190);
► Violence and Harassment Recommendation,
2019 (No. 206);
► ILO Social Protection Floors Recommendation,
2012 (No. 202);
► Transition from the Informal to the Formal
Economy Recommendation, 2015 (No. 204).
► Concluding and enforcing gender-responsive
social security agreements
Bilateral and multilateral social security agreements
are essential to the coordination of social protection
benefits across countries in order to overcome, on
a reciprocal basis, the barriers that might otherwise
prevent migrant workers from receiving benefits
under the system of any of the countries in which
they have worked (Hirose, Nikac and Tamagno 2011,
p. 19). Several ILO Conventions and Recommendations,182 as well as the ILO Multilateral Framework on
Labour Migration (2006), call for the conclusion of such
agreements.
An eight-step process is usually required for the negotiation and conclusion of a social security agreement
(see Chapter 3). Before entering into negotiations
with other countries, governments should gather
social, economic and policy information on migration
and social protection in their own country and in
the country with which they wish to negotiate. To
the extent possible, this should include gender-disaggregated data on migrant stocks and migration
flows between the two countries, the international
conventions of relevance to migrant workers’ social
protection that they have ratified, and other gender-related information. Representatives of the group(s) of
migrant workers who will benefit from the agreement
could also be invited or consulted in order to ensure
that the resulting agreement adequately addresses the
needs of the affected population. Wherever possible,
a gender balance in the negotiation team should be
ensured.
With respect to the content of social security
agreements, the Recommendation on the Maintenance

The Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No. 118); the Maintenance of Social Security Rights Convention 1982 (No.
157); and the Maintenance of Social Security Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No. 167).

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

of Social Security Rights, 1983 (No. 167) includes a
model agreement in annex thereto.183 Social security
agreements commonly include in their first article or
clause definitions of the main terms agreed by the
parties during the negotiations and used throughout
the text and the relevant administrative arrangement.
The use of appropriate terminology is important in
promoting and recognizing gender equality; gendered
language that is stigmatizing or demeaning should be
avoided.
These definitions are normally followed by a section
defining the personal and material scope of the
agreement. The term “personal scope” refers to
the categories of workers covered; it is important to
consider including economic sectors in which women
are disproportionately overrepresented, such as
domestic work and agriculture, in order to ensure
that they are expressly protected in the country of
destination. The term “material scope” refers to the
social security branches or type of schemes (general
or specific) covered; social security agreements
may include any or all of the nine branches of social
security.184
A gender-responsive social security agreement should
include provisions on:
► access to healthcare (including reproductive
healthcare, pre- and post-partum maternity
care and gender-specific preventive care);
► maternity, paternity or parental benefits, taking
into account the specificities of the migrant
workers covered by the agreement;
► survivors’ benefits, using gender-responsive
language that takes into account the fact that
the breadwinner and the dependent survivors
may be women or men. Same-sex couples
should be entitled to the same survivors’
benefits, regardless of the sex and/or gender of
the deceased partner or spouse.
A number of gender considerations related to
pension, sickness, unemployment and employment
injury benefits, cannot be addressed through a social
security agreement and should therefore be covered
by national legislation because they fall within the
scope of statutory social insurance. Their design and
the extension of rights to specific groups are national
matters in which other countries have no say.

Social security agreements address the lack of coordination between social security schemes through the
inclusion of provisions that enshrine all or some of
the key social security principles,185 including equality
of treatment, maintenance of rights in the course of
acquisition (totalization) and acquired rights, payment
of benefits abroad and determination of applicable
legislation (see Chapter 3). The payment of maternity
benefits abroad is of particular importance since
some countries require migrant workers who are no
longer employed to leave the country. In such cases,
the payment of benefits abroad would allow women
migrant workers to access maternity benefits under
the schemes to which they contributed while working.
► Adopting gender-responsive unilateral measures
States may decide to unilaterally extend social
protection to migrant workers in order compensate
for the absence of bilateral or multilateral social
security agreements or for other protection gaps,
including those related to gender. International labour
standards provide essential guidance on the design
and implementation of such unilateral measures.
They should take into account the needs and characteristics of specific groups of migrant workers, such as
migrant domestic workers, migrant seasonal agricultural workers, migrant workers in an irregular situation
and migrants working in the informal economy, and
may thus vary widely from one country to another
(see Chapter 5). Each measure should be designed,
managed, financed, implemented and monitored
based on social dialogue, promote gender equality and
be in line with international labour standards.
It is particularly important to establish and strengthen
well-designed national SPFs in order to promote
gender equality and women’s empowerment and
to support the transition from informal to formal
employment. SPFs are an essential tool for closing
coverage gaps and redressing gender inequalities
in access to social protection. In order to maximise
their potential impacts, gender should be integrated
into every stage of their design, implementation and
monitoring. Well-designed SPFs also facilitate access
to education, health and social services for women,
including migrant women, and enhance their chances
of finding decent employment. (Tessier et al. 2013).
SPFs are important to migrant workers in countries of
destination, as well as for returning migrant workers
and dependents of migrants who remain in the country

183

For more information, see: http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/labour-migration/policy-areas/social-protection/lang--en/index.htm.

184

The nine branches, defined in the ILO’s flagship Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention, 1952 (No. 102), include both
contributory and non-contributory benefits.

185

For an overview of the specific Conventions and Recommendations that promote these key social security principles, see Table 2.1.

217

218

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

of origin. They may comprise age- and gender-responsive social protection programmes, including
non-contributory pregnancy and maternity/paternity
benefits; family allowances; access to care services for
children and dependent persons; access to healthcare,
including maternity and reproductive healthcare;
food support; and social pensions. Social pensions are
particularly important for women who were not able to
contribute to formal social security schemes because
they were working in the informal economy, including,
for example, undeclared care work or work in a family
business. As called for in Recommendation No. 202,
these programmes may be combined with active
labour market policies and other policies that promote
formal employment, income generation, literacy,
vocational training, skills, employability and entrepreneurship.
Social insurance schemes in countries of destination
should be accessible to migrant workers on an equal
basis with nationals based on the principle of equality
of treatment and non-discrimination. Countries of
origin may also wish to allow their nationals working
abroad to retain membership in their social insurance
schemes. In either case, such schemes should take the
specificities of migrant women and men into account
and promote gender equality in accordance with
international human rights instruments and international labour standards. Maternity/paternity protection
should be provided through an insurance-based
system, based on solidarity in terms of funding, rather
than through an employer-funded liability scheme.
Assigning the costs of an employee’s pregnancy (leave
and benefits) to the employer can lead to discrimination in recruitment, the type of employment
contract offered and access to training and capacity-building; income replacement under an employer-funded scheme may also be lower. This is important
because lower maternity benefits undermine women’s
economic independence and reinforce the traditional
gender-based division of labour in the household (ILO
2014). With respect to pension benefits, it is important
to consider special measures to compensate for
interruptions in employment owing to pregnancy and
childcare.

186
187

► Inclusion of gender-responsive provisions on social
protection in bilateral labour agreements (BLAs)
BLAs186 can be useful tools for extending the rights of
migrant workers – including social protection rights
– and can promote gender equality and non-discrimination, provided that they are drafted and
implemented in accordance with the relevant international labour standards. With respect to social security,
equality of treatment between nationals and non-nationals is the guiding principle. To that end, BLAs should
include provisions ensuring that migrant workers are
treated not less favourably than national workers and
should refer to separate social security agreements
(existing or forthcoming) to ensure the portability of
social protection entitlements. They can also include
provisions expressly promoting gender equality and
non-discrimination,187 including with respect to social
protection.
The scope of social protection afforded to migrant
workers by BLAs depends on the social security
branches included in the agreement, the specific groups
of migrant workers covered (for example, domestic
workers, self-employed workers and migrant seasonal
agricultural workers) and the related provisions of
national legislation and other agreements. BLAs can
extend social protection coverage to specific migrant
groups, such as domestic workers, that are excluded
from the labour or social security laws of the country
of employment (as is the case in many Gulf Cooperation Council countries) and face specific vulnerabilities. BLAs specific to domestic workers have been
concluded by several countries (such as Jordan with
Indonesia and Saudi Arabia with the Philippines).
These agreements should address the specific vulnerabilities of and obstacles faced by women migrant
workers with regard to social protection, working
conditions and the risk of gender-based violence and
sexual harassment. Therefore, in addition to generic
provisions promoting gender equality and non-discrimination, they should include provisions on the
complaint and redress mechanisms available in the
event of their violation.

For more information, see Chapter 4.
For instance, Article 18 of the 2002 MoU between Lao PDR and Thailand states: “Labourers of the parties shall receive their wages and
other benefits according to the local wage rates without exception of male or females, race and religion”.

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

In addition, staff involved in the design and implementation of BLAs should receive gender-responsive
training (Gallotti 2014), including with respect to social
protection.
Although they may include provisions on social
protection and/or gender equality, these agreements
and related model contracts are rarely sufficiently
specific and often include only a general reference
to the relevant provisions of national legislation
without detailing the rights and protections available
to migrant workers. In order to make an informed
choice on whether to migrate, these workers need to
be aware of all matters related to their employment
abroad, including their social protection entitlements.

►8.6 Complementary measures
In addition to legal barriers and exclusions, including
in the administration and delivery of social protection
benefits, women and men migrant workers may also
face practical barriers which hinder their effective
access to gender-responsive social protection.
These may include, among other things, administrative procedures, language barriers, lack of social
protection schemes in the country of destination, lack
of information on or knowledge of their rights, and
failure to implement the relevant social security laws
or bilateral/multilateral agreements (see Chapter 1). In
order to address these practical barriers, the following
complementary measures should be considered:
► develop and disseminate in the appropriate
languages gender-responsive communication
campaigns and information materials on migrant
workers’ social protection rights and how to access
them and on non-discrimination and complaint
mechanisms. The material should, among other
things:
► promote non-stigmatizing language and
concepts that challenge negative stereotypes;
► be adapted to the information needs of both
men and women;
► be disseminated through appropriate channels
and at locations frequented by the migrant
workers targeted;
► consult or involve in their design the migrant
workers targeted or the workers’ organizations
that represent them;
► include information on the relationship
between migrant workers’ legal status and their
access to social protection and/or complaint
mechanisms in the event of discrimination,
violence or harassment;

► consider providing gender-responsive training and
education to policymakers and all stakeholders
involved in providing social protection to men and
women migrant workers and to the general public.
Building technical expertise on the intersections
between gender equality, labour migration and
social protection contributes to the design and
implementation of gender-responsive strategies
and schemes;
► collect gender-disaggregated data and information and build a knowledge base that can
be used to advocate for more equitable social
protection policies and to enhance policymakers’
awareness and understanding of the gender gaps
in social protection and migration. Monitoring and
evaluating social protection measures through a
gender lens can support both policymaking and
implementation, thus enhancing gender equality;
► ensure that policies with a direct or indirect impact
on women and men migrant workers’ access
to social protection promote gender equality,
including by:
► adopting measures aimed at reducing the
gender pay gap, including among migrant
workers (Amo-Agyei 2020);
► adopting measures aimed at reducing
violence and harassment (particularly sexual
harassment), trafficking, forced labour,
discrimination in hiring and working conditions,
and withholding pay;
► ensuring that care and domestic work are
recognized as work under the labour laws
and other national legislation in line with the
Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189);
► strengthening employment protection for
pregnant women, and particularly the migrants
among them;
► strengthening maternity and paternity leave
policies in order to reduce the burden on
women migrant workers;
► developing policies aimed at promoting the
transition from the informal to the formal
economy;
► Implementing crisis response measures (as
during the current COVID-19 pandemic);
► promote social dialogue and tripartite consultation with the relevant social partners in order
to better understand the situation of women and
men migrant workers and the different realities
that they face (Briskin and Muller 2011; ILO 2019b).

219

220

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

►8.7 Conclusion
Too often, social protection programmes do not
adequately address the specific needs of women and
girls across their lives. While their reasons for migration
may be similar to those of their male counterparts,
their experiences across the migration cycle differ to a
great extent. Migrant women tend to be less educated
than migrant men and often have little information on
labour market conditions in the country of destination.
Not only do gender norms and familial structures
affect when, where and how women migrate; they also
influence power relations, employment opportunities
and working conditions upon arrival.
These barriers, together with the fact that the global
demand for labour is often defined by gender stereotypes, condemn disproportionate numbers of women
migrant workers to employment in low-skilled jobs
in informal and unregulated sectors that generally
exclude them from social insurance schemes. Persistent
gender-based inequality in earnings and social
insurance schemes designed around a male-breadwinner model and based on uninterrupted, full-time
work in the formal economy also limit women migrant
workers’ ability to meet the qualifying conditions
for these schemes. In the absence of well-designed
unilateral measures, including SPFs, these women are
often left with limited or no access to social protection,
including, among other things, healthcare, old-age
pensions and maternity and unemployment benefits.
The fact that women are at higher risk of sexual and
gender-based violence, abuse, exploitation and human
trafficking further exacerbates their vulnerability.
Social protection policies and schemes should be
designed to counter these forms of discrimination
and should address gender-based differences in
treatment in accordance with the principles of equality
of treatment and non-discrimination established in
various international human rights instruments and
international labour standards. These include, among
others, the International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of all Migrant Workers and Members
of their Families (1990), the UN Convention on the

Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (1979; entry into force 1981), the ILO Violence
and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No. 190), the ILO
Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No.
202), the ILO Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No.
189), the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions)
Convention, 1975 (No. 143) and the Discrimination
(Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No.
111).
SPFs based on these provisions and recommendations are a powerful tool that can progressively close
social protection coverage gaps and promote the
empowerment of women, thereby increasing their
bargaining power and helping them to advance
towards gender equality. In order to maximize their
impact and that of other social protection systems and
schemes, policymakers should ensure that they are
designed, implemented and monitored in a gender-responsive manner. If this is not done, the resulting
gender-blind schemes and systems can perpetuate
and even exacerbate unequal gender relations.
In addition to this tool, several other policy options can
facilitate the extension of social protection to women
and men migrant workers. These include the ratification and application of key international labour
standards, conclusion of gender-responsive social
security agreements, adoption of other gender-responsive unilateral measures, inclusion of gender-responsive provisions on social protection in bilateral
labour agreements, and other complementary
measures designed to overcome the practical
obstacles that hinder migrant workers’ effective access
to gender-responsive social protection.
The effective and equitable access to social protection
established through these various policy options is
key to the achievement of gender equality. This is
all the more important during emergencies such as
the COVID-19 pandemic as they tend to intensify the
inequalities faced by women and girls, and particularly
migrants, displaced persons and refugees who are
already in a vulnerable situation.

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

► Bibliography
Abdulloev, Ilhom, Ira N. Gang and Myeong-Su Yun. 2014. “Migration, Education and the Gender
Gap in Labour Force Participation”. Bonn: IZA.
Aggarwal, Varun, Federica La China and Lucia Vaculova. 2016. Irregular Migration, Refugees and
Informal Labour Markets in the EU: The Rise of European Sweatshops? Brussels: European Institute
for Asian Studies.
Amo-Agyei, Silas. 2020. The Migrant Pay Gap: Understanding Wage Differences between migrants
and nationals. ILO.
CEDAW (UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women). 2008. General
Recommendation No. 26 on Women Migrant Workers.
Bilecen, Basak, Karolina Barglowski, Thomas Faist and Eleonore Kofman. 2019. “Gendered Dynamics
of Transnational Social Protection”. Comparative Migration Studies 7:47.
Bizikova, Livia. 2017. “Disaggregated Data is Essential to Leave No One Behind”. International
Institute for Sustainable Development (ISSD) Blog (blog). 12 October 2017. https://iisd.org/library/
disaggregated-data-essential-leave-no-one-behind.
Briskin, Linda and Angelika Muller. 2011. Promoting Gender Equality through Social Dialogue: Global
Trends and Persistent Obstacles. Geneva: ILO.
CARE and Promundo. 2017. Men and Boys in Displacement: Assistance and Protection Challenges for
Unaccompanied Boys and Men in Refugee Contexts.
Conger, Krista. 2017. “Of Mice, Men and Women: Making Research More Inclusive”. Stanford
Medicine, Spring 2017.
Doering, Laura and Sarah Thébaud. 2017. “The Effects of Gendered Occupational Roles on Men’s
and Women’s Workplace Authority: Evidence from Microfinance”. American Sociological Review
82 (3): 542-567.
EIGE (Europe Institute for Gender Equality). 2020. “Gender Mainstreaming”. Vilnius. https://eige.
europa.eu/thesaurus/terms/1185.
Ferrant, Gaelle, Luca Maria Pesando and Keiko Nowacka. 2014. Unpaid Care Work: The Missing Link in
the Analysis of Gender Gaps in Labour Outcomes. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD). https://www.oecd.org/dev/development-gender/Unpaid_care_
work.pdf.
Fitzpatrick, Tony, Huck-ju Kwon, Nick Manning, James Midgley, and Gillian Pascall, eds. 2006. “Male
Breadwinner Model”. In International Encyclopaedia of Social Policy: 3 Volume Set. London:
Routledge. http://cw.routledge.com/ref/socialpolicy/male.html#:~:text=The per cent20male
per cent20breadwinner per cent20model per cent20is,the per cent20public per cent20and per
cent20private per cent20spheres.
Foresti, Marta. 2016. Women on the move. Migration, Gender Equality and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. London: Overseas Development Institute (ODI). https://cdn.odi.org/
media/documents/10731.pdf.

221

222

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

GAATW (Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women). 2019. “Social Protection, Public Services, and
Sustainable Infrastructure for Women Migrant Workers and Trafficked Persons”. Background
paper for the 63rd session of the UN Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), March 2019.
https://gaatw.org/advocacy/GAATW per cent20Paper per cent20Social per cent20Protections
per cent20CSW per cent2063.pdf.
Gallotti, Maria. 2014. Incorporating gender issues in BLAs and MOUs. Presentation at the ILO-KNOMAD
Technical Workshop on Review of Bilateral Agreements on Low-skilled Labour Migration,
Kathmandu, 1-2 December 2014.
Ganesha, Amal. 2018. “Indonesia Set to Lift Ban on Sending Migrant Workers to Middle East”.
Jakarta Globe, 31 May 2018.
Germany, LADS (Berlin State Office for Equal Treatment and Against Discrimination). 2016. LGBTO
Refugees: Situation, Protection and Support.
Gold, Michael. 2019. “The ABCs of L.G.B.T.Q.I.A.+”. New York Times, 21 June 2018.
Hennebry, Jenna. 2017. For Their Own Good? Addressing Exploitation of Women Migrant Workers.
Geneva: IOM.
Hennebry, Jenna and Allison Petrozziello. 2019. “Closing the Gap? Gender and the Global Compacts
for Migration and Refugees”. International Migration 57 (6): 115–138.
Hirose, Kenichi, Milos Nikac and Edward Tamagno. 2011. Social Security for Migrant Workers: A Rightsbased Approach. Geneva: ILO.
Holmes, Rebecca and Lucy Scott. 2016. Extending Social Insurance to Informal Workers: A Gender
Analysis. London: Overseas Development Institute (ODI).
Holmes, Rebecca, Nicola Jones and Pilar Domingo. 2019. “The Politics of Gender-responsive
Social Protection”. London: Overseas Development Institute (ODI). https://odi.org/en/
publications/the-politics-of-gender-responsive-social-protection/#:~:text=The%20past%20
decade%20has%20seen,girls’%20empowerment%20through%20social%20protection.&text=Addressing%20gender%20inequality%20is%20often,role%20as%20mothers%20or%20
caregivers.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 1993. Resolution concerning the International Classification
of Status in Employment (ICSE). Fifteenth International Conference of Labour Statisticians.
–––. 2006. “Decent Work for All: UN Moves to Strengthen Global Efforts and Sustainable Development
to Promote Decent Work for Poverty Reduction”. World of Work 57, September 2006: 4–9.
–––. 2008. ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization.
–––. 2011. Social Protection Floor for a Fair and Inclusive Globalization.
–––. 2014. Maternity and Paternity at Work: Law and Practice Across the World.
–––. 2015. ILO Global Estimates of Migrant Workers and Migrant Domestic Workers: Results and
Methodology. Special Focus on Migrant Domestic Workers.
–––. 2016. Women at Work: Trends.
–––. 2018a. Care Work and Care Jobs for the Future of Decent Work.

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

–––. 2018b. ILO Global Estimates on International Migrant Workers: Results and Methodology.
–––. 2019a. ILO Centenary Declaration for The Future of Work. ILC.108.
–––. 2019b. The Contribution of Social Dialogue to Gender Equality.
–––. 2019c. Rules of the Game: An Introduction to the Standards-related Work of the International Labour
Organization.
–––. 2020a. “Almost 25 Million Jobs Could be Lost Worldwide as a Result Of COVID-19, Says ILO”.
Press release, 18 March 2020. https://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/
WCMS_738742/lang--en/index.htm.
–––. 2020b. The COVID-19 Response: Getting Gender Equality Right for a Better Future for Women at
Work.
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---gender/documents/publication/
wcms_744685.pdf.
---. 2021. ILO Global Estimates on International Migrant Workers - Results and Methodology - Third
edition.
International Commission of Jurists. 2007. The Yogyakarta Principles: Principles on the Application of
International Human Rights Law in Relation to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. Geneva.
IOM (International Organization for Migration). 2016. Migration and Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans
and Intersex (LGBTI) People.
–––. n.d. “Género y migración”. www.iom.int/es/genero-y-migracion
ITUC (International Trade Union Confederation). 2018. Economic and Social Policy Brief: Gender Gaps
in Social Protection.
Kiaušienė, Ilona, Dalia Štreimikienė and Dainora Grundey. 2011. “On Gender Stereotyping and
Employment Assimetries”. Economics and Sociology 4 (2): 84-97.
King-Dejardin, Amelita. 2019. The Social Construction of Migrant Care Work: At the Intersection of Care,
Migration and Gender. Geneva: ILO.
Memela, Sinehlanhla and Brij Maharaj. 2016. “Challenges Facing Refugee Women: A Critical
Review”. In Global Change and Human Mobility, edited by Josefina Domínguez-Mujica, 53-72.
Berlin: Springer.
Mendos, Lucas Ramon. 2019. State-Sponsored Homophobia Report 2019: Global Legislation Overview
Update. Geneva: ILGA World.
Napier-Moore, Rebecca. 2017. Protected or Put in Harm’s Way? Bans and Restrictions on Women’s
Labour Migration in ASEAN Countries. Bangkok: ILO and UNWomen (United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women).
Negro, D. 2010. “Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity and Expression in the Inter-American
System”. International Agenda 28: 153–175.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) and ILO. 2019. Tackling
vulnerability in the informal economy. Paris: OECD.
OSCE (Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe). 2009. Guide on Gender-Sensitive
Labour Migration Policies.

223

224

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

Oxford English Dictionary. 2015. “Intersectionality”.
Ozturk, Lamiha, Zehra Vildan Serin and Hamdiye Altinoz. 2019. “Challenges and Obstacles for Syrian
Refugee Women in the Turkish Labor Market”. Societies 9 (3).
PAHO (Pan American Health Organization). 2019. Technical Brief: Gender Equality in Addressing the
Causes and Consequences of the Health of Migrant Women.
Piper, Nicola. 2006. “Gendering the politics of migration”. International Migration Review 40 (1):
133–164.
Rai, Bhrukuti. 2019. “Nepal’s Labour Migration Policy: By Men, for Men”. Kathmandu Post.
Runyan, Anne Sisson. 2018. “What Is Intersectionality and Why Is It Important?”. Academe,
November–December 2018. https://www.aaup.org/article/what-intersectionality-and-why-itimportant#.X6a7dmhKg2x.
Shaw, Judith. 2005. “Overseas Migration in the Household Economies of Microfinance Clients:
Evidence from Sri Lanka”. In Remittances, Microfinance and Development: Building the Link, edited
by Judith Shaw. Brisbane: Foundation for Development Cooperation.
Sijapati, Bandita. 2015. “Women’s Labour Migration from Asia and the Pacific: Opportunities and
Challenges”. Issue in Brief 12, March 2015.
SPIAC-B (Social Protection Inter-agency Cooperation Board). 2019. “Social Protection to Promote
Gender Equality and Women’s and Girls’ Empowerment”, paper presented at the 63rd session
of the Commission on the Status of Women.
Suriyasarn, Busakorn. 2014. Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation in Thailand. Bangkok: ILO.
Taran, Patrick. 2016. “Migrant Women, Women Migrant Workers: Crucial Challenges for Rightsbased Action and Advocacy”, paper presented on behalf of Global Migration Policy Associates
(GMPA) at the OHCHR-UNWOMEN side event to the 64th Session of the UN Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), Geneva, 21 July 2016. https://www.
ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CMW/SideEvent2016/PatrickTaran.pdf.
Temin, Miriam, Mark Montgomery, Sarah Engebretsen and Kathryn Barker. 2013. Girls on the Move:
Adolescent Girls and Migration in the Developing World. A Girls Count Report on Adolescent Girls.
New York: Population Council.
Tessier, Lou, Maya Stern Plaza, Christina Behrendt, Florence Bonnet and Emmanuelle St-Pierre
Guibault. 2013. “Social Protection Floors and Gender Equality: A Brief Overview”. Geneva: ILO.
Torada Máñez, Rebeca, Larraitz Lexartza Artza and Juliana Martínez Franzoni. 2012. Fighting
inequality from the Basics: The Social Protection Floor and Gender Equality: Executive Summary. ILO,
UNDP and United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women.
Torrisi, Claudia. 2017. “The double stigma of LGBTI asylum seekers”. Open Migration, 31 March
2017. https://openmigration.org/en/analyses/the-double-stigma-of-lgbti-refugees/.
UN (United Nations). 2020. Policy Brief: The Impact of COVID-19 on Women.
–––. n.d. “Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls”. https://sdgs.un.org/
goals/goal5.
–––. n.d. “The 17 Goals”. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300.
–––. UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2016. International
Migration Report 2015: Highlights.
–––. 2018. Promoting Inclusion Through Social Protection: Report on the World Social Situation 2018.

Chapter 8
Gender, social protection and labour migration

–––. UNDP (United Nations Development Program). 2020. Gender inequality and the COVID-19 crisis:
A Human Development perspective.
–––. 1995. Fourth World Conference on Women (September 1995, Beijing, China). https://www.
un.org/en/events/pastevents/women_conf_beijing_1995.shtml.
UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund). 2015. “Female Migrants”, paper presented at the Second
Mayoral Forum on Mobility, Migration and Development, Quito, Ecuador, 12–13 November
2015.
UNWomen (United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women). 2013.
Managing Labour Migration in ASEAN: Concerns for Women Migrant Workers.
–––. 2015a. Women Migrant Workers’ Human Rights.
–––. 2015b. Progress of the World’s Women 2015–2016: Transforming Economies, Realizing Rights.
–––. 2020a. “In Focus: Gender Equality Matters in COVID-19 Response”.
https://www.unwomen.org/en/news/in-focus/in-focus-gender-equality-in-covid-19-response.
–––. 2020b. Addressing the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on women migrant workers.
–––. n.d. “Gender Mainstreaming: Concepts and Definitions”. https://www.un.org/womenwatch/
osagi/conceptsandefinitions.htm.
Van Ham, Peter. 2014. Transnational Governance and Democratic Legitimacy: A Conceptual Overview.
The Hague: Netherlands Institute for International Relations.
Walk Free Foundation (2019). “Ethiopia’s New Migration Policy: A Positive Step but Continued
Scrutiny Needed”. ReliefWeb, 14 June 2019. https://reliefweb.int/report/ethiopia/ethiopia-snew-migration-policy-positive-step-continued-scrutiny-needed.
Wickramasekara, Piyasiri. 2012. Something is Better than Nothing: Enhancing the Protection of Indian
Migrant Workers through Bilateral Agreements and Memoranda of Understanding. Global Migration
Policy Associates (GMPA).
–––. 2015. Bilateral Agreements and Memoranda of Understanding on Migration of Low Skilled Workers:
A Review. Geneva: ILO.
World Bank. 2011. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development.
Yeoh, Brenda, Elspeth Graham and Paul Boyle. 2002. “Migrations and Family Relations in the Asia
Pacific Region”. Asian and Pacific Migration Journal 11 (1): 1–11.

225

226

Extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families
A guide for policymakers and practitioners

A call for action
Social protection can offer income security and protection against risks
throughout the life cycle and is widely recognized as contributing to poverty
reduction and sustainable development. Its critical role as a social and economic
stabilizer has become all the more visible during the COVID-19 crisis. Yet too
many migrant workers, refugees and their families, who are often the hardest
hit in times of crisis, are still excluded from social protection. The importance
of ensuring access to and maintenance of social protection coverage across
countries has been emphasized repeatedly throughout this Guide.

As evidenced across the globe, crises can have a
serious social and economic impact on countries of
origin, destination and transit, creating inequalities
and leaving migrant workers, and particularly migrant
women, even further behind.
The fact that millions of individuals are denied access
to social protection services and programmes shows
that more needs to be done to make social security
a right enjoyed by all. This will require not only the
design and implementation of nationally appropriate
and inclusive social protection systems, but also the
portability of benefits across borders. Failure to take
these steps come at a high political and economic cost
for governments, hinder their development efforts
and, most importantly, contradict human rights and
universal values.

227

To fill this important protection gap and ensure that all migrant workers, refugees and their families have access to
social protection, countries should take urgent action and consider the following measures:
1. ratification and implementation of the ILO
Conventions and Recommendations on labour
migration and social security as an important step
in providing more comprehensive protection to
migrant workers. This requires strong political
commitment in order to ensure universal enjoyment
of the right to social security, irrespective of origin,
migration status, race, gender or age. Where
the relevant Conventions have not been ratified,
the principles and standards established therein
should be incorporated in national laws and policy
frameworks;

► include migrant workers in crisis response
measures in line with international human rights
and labour standards;
► ensure the progressive inclusion of currently
excluded groups of migrants in policies, laws,
emergency measures and national social
protection schemes;
► provide refugees and asylum seekers with
access to the labour market and national social
protection systems, both contributory and noncontributory;
► adjust minimum contribution and residence
requirements to the specific needs of migrants by,
for example, establishing exemptions or lowering
residence requirements;

2. conclusion and implementation of bilateral and
multilateral social security agreements ensuring
equality of treatment and portability of benefits
abroad. These agreements should be as inclusive
as possible, particularly with regard to seasonal
agricultural workers, domestic workers, seafarers and
workers in the informal economy. The international
labour standards provide useful guidance for their
development and a detailed model social security
agreement is provided in annex to the Maintenance
of Social Security Rights Recommendation, 1983 (No.
167);

5. Involve workers’ and employers’ organizations in
the design and implementation of social security
reforms and the negotiation of social security and
labour agreements through effective social dialogue;

3. inclusion of social security provisions in temporary
labour migration programmes and bilateral labour
agreements in line with international labour
standards. A model agreement is provided in annex
to the Migration for Employment Recommendation,
1949 (No. 86) and UN guidance on BLMAs, including
a section on social protection, will be published in
2021;

7. Remove the practical obstacles that compromise
migrant workers’ effective access to social
protection by, for example, simplifying registration
and other administrative procedures, ensuring
that information is available and accessible in the
appropriate language(s) and establishing effective
appeal and complaint procedures for migrants and
their families;

4. development and implementation of unilateral
measures by countries of origin and destination in
order to extend social protection to migrant workers,
refugees and their families. These measures should:

8. Ensure that migrant workers have a voice in decisionmaking processes concerning the design or reform
of social protection policies, laws and agreements;

► ensure equal treatment of migrant and national
workers in respect of social protection under
national policies and legislation, based on the
principles of equality of treatment and nondiscrimination and in line with international
human rights instruments and international
labour standards;
► establish and maintain national SPFs as a tool
for reducing poverty, promoting social inclusion
and ensuring basic social security guarantees to
migrants and their families throughout their life
cycle;

6. Collect data on the social protection of migrant
workers and monitor existing programmes in order
to inform evidence-base policymaking;

9. Create an enabling environment for migrant workers,
and particularly those who do not have access to
public social protection schemes, to explore privateled micro-insurance schemes, whether community
based or not. These do not relieve the State of its
responsibility to provide all residents and children
with at least a set of basic social security guarantees
that secure their protection in accordance with the
ILO Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012
(No. 202).

Extending social protection to migrant
workers, refugees and their families:
A guide for policymakers and practitioners
This Guide is intended to provide policymakers and practitioners, including
workers’ and employers’ representatives, with practical guidance on how to
extend social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families. This
Guide contains a variety of policy and administrative options for consideration
and adaptation to specific groups and situations, taking the complexity of
current migratory movements into account. The policy measures presented
are accompanied by selected country and regional practices. The guide will
inform users of the ILO approach, standards and tools developed and relevant
for extending social protection to migrant workers, refugees and their families.

Certain sections of the Guide benefited from ILO multi-stakeholder projects involving the following partners:
Funding partners

Other partners

