2015
The State of Food and Agriculture
Social protection and agriculture:
breaking the cycle of rural poverty

Cover photo:
The Chairperson of the Dundat-Urguu forest user group in Mongolia with his family (© FAO/S. Gallagher).

2015
ISSN 0081-4539

The State of
Food and Agriculture
Social protection and agriculture:
breaking the cycle of rural poverty

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Rome, 2015

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information
product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) concerning the legal
or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The mention of specific
companies or products of manufacturers, whether or not these have been patented,
does not imply that these have been endorsed or recommended by FAO in preference
to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.
ISBN 978-92-5-108861-6
© FAO, 2015
FAO encourages the use, reproduction and dissemination of material in this information
product. Except where otherwise indicated, material may be copied, downloaded and
printed for private study, research and teaching purposes, or for use in non-commercial
products or services, provided that appropriate acknowledgement of FAO as the source
and copyright holder is given and that FAO’s endorsement of users’ views, products or
services is not implied in any way.
All requests for translation and adaptation rights, and for resale and other commercial
use rights should be made via www.fao.org/contact-us/licence-request or addressed to
copyright@fao.org.
FAO information products are available on the FAO website (www.fao.org/publications)
and can be purchased through publications-sales@fao.org.

iii

Contents
Foreword
Acknowledgements
Abbreviations and acronyms
Executive summary
Social protection and agriculture: breaking the cycle of rural poverty
1.		 Social protection and agriculture to break the cycle of rural poverty
Linking poverty, social protection and agriculture
Poverty, rural poverty and agriculture
Why is poverty so persistent?
What is social protection?
Global and regional trends in social protection coverage
How can social protection and agriculture help eradicate poverty?
Is social protection affordable?
Structure of the report
2.		 Social protection for rural poverty reduction and increased food security
Social protection can help reduce poverty
Social protection and food security
Gender-sensitive social protection is critical for food security
Key messages
3.		 The potential impacts of social protection on investment and growth
Why and how would social protection stimulate investment?
Social protection can stimulate investment in human resources and productive
activities
Social protection influences household labour allocation
Social protection facilitates participation in social networks
Public works provide local infrastructure and other community assets
Overall, social protection can have substantial positive local economy impacts
Key messages
4.		 Understanding what works: implications for programme design
		 and implementation
Targeting may help achieve programme objectives at lower costs
Level, timing and predictability of transfers matter
Household-level factors influence programme impacts
Impacts are gender-differentiated
Programme design matters
Markets matter too
Key messages
5.		 Social protection and agricultural development
Combining interventions into joint programmes
Complementary interventions are essential to address malnutrition effectively
Social protection and agricultural input subsidies
Credit to agriculture
Institutional procurement programmes
Bringing the sectors together: the critical issue of targeting
Key messages

vi
viii
x
xii
1
3
4
6
9
15
17
20
23
24
25
25
29
31
34
35
35
38
45
47
49
50
52
53
53
57
59
60
60
61
61
62
63
64
66
68
69
77
78

iv

6		 Conclusions: building on synergies between social protection and agricultural
		 policies to break the cycle of rural poverty
Social protection programmes are effective in reducing poverty and hunger
Social protection can promote investment in productive activities
Social protection does not reduce work effort
Social protection has positive impacts on local communities and economies
Programme design and implementation, and household characteristics determine
programme impacts
Social protection and agriculture must work together in combating poverty and
hunger
A national vision is needed
Key messages of the report

Statistical annex
Notes on the annex tables
TABLE A1 Poverty headcount ratios and underweight prevalence among children
TABLE A2 Agriculture’s importance in the economy and labour force, fertilizer use
intensity, farm size and women’s involvement in agriculture
TABLE A3 Social assistance coverage, by population group
TABLE A4 Social assistance transfer amounts, by population group, and benefit
		
incidence

References		
Special chapters of The State of Food and Agriculture

80
81
83
83
83
84
84
84
85

87
89
92
96
102
106

113
128

TABLES
1.
2.
3.
4.

Targeting methods employed by selected social assistance programmes
Programme impacts across households
Input subsidy schemes implemented by selected countries, by scale and region, 2007–12
Shares of rural households receiving social assistance and/or agricultural
input subsidies, by type of assistance received
5. Major credit instruments adopted by select countries, by type and region, 2007–12

55
60
66
68
69

BOXES
1. Impact evaluation and social protection
2. Vulnerability of fisherfolk is pronounced
3. School-feeding programmes
4 . Achieving Zero Hunger
5. Conditional cash transfer programmes and conditional in-kind transfer programmes
6. Unconditional cash transfer programmes and unconditional in-kind transfer programmes
7. India’s Mahatma Ghandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
8. Social protection and seasonality
9. Social risk management
10. Contribution of social protection to resilience
11. Gender plays an important role in investment decisions and productivity
12. The impact of social protection programmes on prices
13. Targeting methods for social protection programmes
14. Cadastro Único

5
13
18
24
26
27
28
29
36
37
44
51
54
57

v

15. Designing nutrition-enhancing social protection policies and programmes
16. Fertilizer subsidies need complementary interventions to effectively promote
pro-poor growth
17. Agricultural insurance
18. Home-grown school feeding in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Honduras
19. Producer organizations play a key role
20. Creating appropriate legal frameworks
21. The Family Farm Register
22. The Brazilian Water Cistern Programme
23. Targeting methods for agricultural interventions
24. The Social Protection Floor
25. Strengthening the enabling environment for coherent agricultural and social protection
interventions

65
67
70
72
73
74
76
77
78
81
82

FIGURES
1. Social protection linkages to household consumption and production activities
and the local economy
2. Number of people and shares of population living in poverty in low- and
middle-income countries
3. Shares of the population in low- and middle-income countries living in extreme
poverty, by region
4. Share of rural and urban populations in low- and middle-income countries living
in extreme poverty (less than $1.25 a day), by region
5. Shares of income from on-farm activities by poorest and richest agricultural
households in selected low- and middle-income countries
6. Average share of income earned by agricultural households, by source and farm
size quartile
7. The scope of social protection
8. Shares of population covered by different types of social protection programme,
by region
9. Shares of extreme poor in low- and middle-income countries covered by social
assistance, social insurance and labour market programmes
10. Shares of rural and urban populations covered by social assistance, by region
11. Shares of rural population covered by social assistance, by income quintile
and region
12. Hypothetical welfare trajectories for different types of households in poverty
13. The local income multiplier effect of social cash transfer programmes
14. Transfer amount as a share of beneficiary household income

6
7
8
9
10
11
17
19
20
21
20
22
50
58

vi

Foreword
In recent decades we have made considerable
progress in fighting global hunger and
poverty. A majority – 72 out of 129 – of the
countries monitored by FAO have achieved
the Millennium Development Goal target of
halving the prevalence of undernourishment
by 2015, with developing regions as a
whole missing the target by a small margin.
In addition, 29 countries have met the
more ambitious goal laid out at the World
Food Summit in 1996, when governments
committed to halving the absolute number of
undernourished people by 2015. Meanwhile
the share of people in developing countries
living in extreme poverty has fallen from
43 percent in 1990 to 17 percent this year
(World Bank, 2015a).
But progress has been uneven among
countries and regions. The prevalence of
hunger and poverty has fallen substantially
in some regions, especially in East Asia and
the Pacific as well as Southeast Asia. But in
South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, progress
has been slow overall, despite some country
success stories.
Some 795 million people continue to suffer
from hunger according to The State of Food
Insecurity in the World 2015 (FAO, IFAD and
WFP, 2015a), and almost one billion people
live in extreme poverty (World Bank, 2015a).
Most of these people live in rural areas and
rely on agriculture for much of their incomes.
This is why it is urgent that we act to
support the most vulnerable people in
order to free the world of hunger. Economic
growth, especially in agriculture, has been
essential to driving down hunger and
poverty rates. Thus, investment in agriculture
remains the single most effective way to
provide opportunities to generate income
and improve nutrition, especially for women
and youth in rural areas.
However, even with economic growth,
the struggle to escape from hunger and
poverty is often slow, as growth may not be
inclusive. For some groups, such as children
and the elderly, economic growth may bring
little relief, or come too late to prevent
deprivation and lasting disadvantage.

To eradicate hunger and poverty, we need
a combination of sustained private and public
investments and social protection measures.
Eradicating world hunger sustainably by
2030 will require an estimated additional
US$267 billion per year on average for
investments in rural and urban areas and in
social protection, so poor people have access
to food and can improve their livelihoods.
This is more or less equivalent to 0.3 percent
of the global GDP and would average US$160
annually for each person living in extreme
poverty over the fifteen-year period (FAO,
IFAD and WFP, 2015b).
Surely this is a relatively small price to pay
to end hunger in our lifetimes!
In addition to the investments in the
agriculture sector and in rural development,
investments in social protection programmes
are needed.
Many countries in the developing world
increasingly recognize that social protection
measures are needed to reduce and/or
prevent poverty and hunger immediately. As
a result, social protection programmes have
expanded rapidly in recent years, although
there is great diversity in the nature of
programmes, even within the same country.
Numerous studies have shown social
protection programmes have been successful
in reducing hunger and poverty. In 2013,
social protection helped lift up to 150 million
people out of extreme poverty.
Social protection allows households
to increase and diversify their food
consumption, often through increased
own production. Positive impacts on
child and maternal welfare are enhanced
when programmes are gender-sensitive
or targeted at women. This is especially
important because maternal and child
malnutrition perpetuate poverty from
generation to generation.
Social protection programmes not only
protect consumption. The evidence shows
that social protection fosters more investment
in the education and health of children, and
reduces child labour, with implications for
future productivity and employability.

vii

When well implemented, and transfers are
regular and predictable, social protection
also facilitates increased investment in onfarm production activities, including inputs,
tools and livestock, as well as in non-farm
enterprises. Even relatively small transfers
help the poor overcome liquidity and credit
constraints, and provide insurance against
some risks that deter them from pursuing
higher-return activities.
Finally, social protection has positive
impacts on local communities and
economies. Public works programmes
can provide important infrastructure and
community assets and directly contribute
to the local economy when designed
and implemented well. School-feeding
programmes can help combat malnutrition
and act as an incentive to ensure children
get an education. Additional income
provided by social protection programmes
increases demand for locally produced goods
and services, contributing to a virtuous circle
of local economic growth.
Notwithstanding its proven effectiveness,
social protection alone cannot sustainably
move people out of hunger and poverty. But
linking agriculture with social protection can
create virtuous circles of local development.
Proven “win-win” solutions that support
family farming through social protection
include ‘institutional purchases’ from
local farmers for school meals and other
government programmes, including social
protection programmes enabling greater
consumption of locally produced food.

It is possible to cite financing constraints
to implementing such programmes, but
these are closely linked to the political will
needed to make the necessary expenditure
choices. Pilot programmes as well as careful
monitoring and evaluation can help start
the policy dialogue to build national
support for financing such social assistance
measures. At least part of this financing
must be generated domestically to provide
a sustainable basis for social protection
programmes.
Country experiences over the last couple
of decades prove that ending hunger, food
insecurity and malnutrition is possible. They
also show that there is a lot of work ahead
to transform that vision into reality. Political
commitment, partnerships, adequate
funding and comprehensive actions are key
elements in this effort.
We are committed to supporting national
and other efforts to make hunger and
malnutrition history. The 2012 General
Assembly resolution on a Social Protection
Floor, the Zero Hunger Challenge, the 2014
Rome Declaration on Nutrition, the 2015
Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the post2015 Sustainable Development Goals are
some of the recent manifestations of the
international community’s support. This
edition of The State of Food and Agriculture
focusing on social protection elaborates
on our unequivocal support to strengthen
national capacities and capabilities to
successfully develop and deliver needed
programmes.

José Graziano da Silva
FAO Director-General

viii

Acknowledgements
The State of Food and Agriculture 2015 was
prepared by members of FAO’s Agricultural
Development Economics Division (ESA) under
the overall leadership of Kostas Stamoulis,
Director of ESA, Benjamin Davis, DeputyDirector of ESA and Terri Raney, Senior
Economist and Chief Editor (ESA). Additional
guidance was provided by Rob Vos, Director
of the FAO Social Protection Division (ESP),
and Jomo Kwame Sundaram, Assistant
Director-General of the Economic and Social
Development Department (ESD).
The research and writing team was led
by André Croppenstedt and Benjamin Davis
and included Raffaele Bertini, Sarah Lowder,
Terri Raney, Gina Talt and Ellen Wielezynski
(ESA). We acknowledge a special debt to
John Hoddinott of the International Food
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Several colleagues from throughout
FAO provided inputs and/or reviewed the
report. From ESA: Sherry Ajemian, Federica
Alfani, Alban Mas Aparisi, Solomon Asfaw,
Jean Balié, Giulia Calcagnini, Alessandro
Carraro, Silvio Daidone, Marco D’Errico,
Josh Dewbre, Juan Carlos García y Cebolla,
Maja Gavrilovich, Leopold Ghins, Julius
Jackson, Panagiotis Karfakis, Marco
Knowles, Giuseppe Maggio, Renata Mirulla,
Robert Pickmans, Ervin Prifti, Alessandro
Romeo, Maria Angelita Ruvalcaba, Ashwini
Sebastian, Jakob Skoet, Massimiliano
Terzini, Nyasha Tirivayi and Smriti Tiwari.
From ESP: Vito Cistulli, Azeta Cungu,
Christina Dankmeyer, Ana Paula de la O
Campos, Elisenda Estruch, Chiara Gnetti,
Ceren Gurkan, Militezegga Abduk Mustafa,
Cristina Rapone and Peter Wobst; From
other FAO units in headquarters: Michael
Clark, Piero Conforti, Mauro Eduardo Del
Grossi, Frédéric Deve, Charlotte Dufour,
Christopher Emsden, Nicole Franz, Tomomi
Ishida, Daniela Kalikoski, Siobhan Kelly,
Israel Klug, Martina Kress, Erdgin Mane, Neil
Marsland, Ellen Muehlhoff, Erwin Northoff,
Florence Poulain, Pamela Pozarny, Ahmed
Raza, Michele Rocca, Susana Siar, Coumba
Sow, Luana Swensson, Florence Tartanac,
Lucas Tavares and Francesco Tubiello.

From FAO Regional Offices: Mohamed
Ag Bendech and Cisse Al Hassan (Africa),
David Dawe (Asia and the Pacific), David
Sedik (Europe), Pablo Faret, Alejandro Flores
and Ricardo Rapallo (Latin America and the
Caribbean), and Nasredin Hag Elamin (Near
East and North Africa).
Background papers and inputs were
prepared by: Armando Barrientos, Brooks
World Poverty Institute, Manchester
University; Vicente P.M. de Azevedo
Marques, National Institute for Colonization
and Land Reform, Brazil; Mauro Eduardo
Del Grossi (University of Brasilia, Brazil and
ESS); Fábio Veras Soares, Ana Carla Miranda,
Ryan Nehring, Mario Gyori, Andrew Howe,
and Cristina Cirillo, International Policy
Centre for Inclusive Growth (IPC-IG); John
Hoddinott, Melissa Hidrobo, Neha Kumar
and Meghan Olivier (IFPRI); Nicola Jones,
Rebecca Holmes, Anna McCord, Elizabeth
Presler-Marshall and Maria Stavropoulou,
Overseas Development Institute (ODI).
The report benefited from external
reviews and advice from many international
experts: Harry Palmier and Mark
Holderness, Global Forum on Agricultural
Research (GFAR); Gustavo Gordillo de Anda,
National Autonomous University of Mexico;
Jonathan Kydd, Broadstone Economics;
Bénédicte Leroy de la Brière, Stefano
Paternostro, Maddalena Honorati, Claudia
P. Rodriguez Alas and Alberto Zezza, World
Bank; Niels Balzer, Sarah Kohnstamm, Kenn
Crossley, Victor Tsang, Natalie Aldern,
Ahnna Gudmunds, Barbara Pfister, Volli
Carucci, Cecilia Costella and Charlotte Cuny,
World Food Programme (WFP); Tomás
Rosada, International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD); Jennifer Yablonski
and Sudhanshu Handa, United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF); Fábio Veras
Soares, Ryan Nehring, Ana Carla Miranda
and Cristina Cirillo (IPC-IG); Nicola Jones,
Anna McCord and Maria Stavropoulou
(ODI); John Hoddinott, Neha Kumar,
Melissa Hidrobo and Meghan Olivier (IFPRI);
Vikas Rawal, Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi.

ix

We gratefully acknowledge the initial
guidance for the study from participants of
a workshop at which background papers
were presented. The workshop was expertly
facilitated by Rhiannon Pyburn from the
Royal Tropical Institute of the Netherlands
(KIT). A later technical review workshop,
which discussed and reviewed the first
comprehensive draft, was equally important,
providing quality control and refining the
focus of the report.
Michelle Kendrick (ESD), with assistance
from Beatriz Fernández (ESA), coordinated
the editorial, graphics, layout and publishing

process. Graphic design and layout services
were supplied by Flora Dicarlo. Liliana
Maldonado, Paola Di Santo, Leonardo Leon,
and Antonella Appuzo di Portanova (ESA)
provided administrative support. Marco
Mariano and Tomaso Lezzi arranged for IT
support throughout the process. Production
of the language editions was coordinated
by the FAO Library and Publications Branch
of the Office for Corporate Communication.
Translation and printing services were
delivered by the Meeting Programming and
Documentation Service of the FAO Conference,
Council and Protocol Affairs Division.

x

Abbreviations and acronyms
Bolsa Família

Conditional cash transfer programme, Brazil.

BRAC

Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee

CadÚnico

Single Registry for the Federal Government Social Programmes

CCT

conditional cash transfer

CFPR-TUP

Challenging the Frontiers of Poverty Reduction – Targeting the Ultra Poor
programme, Bangladesh

CGP

Child Grant Programme, Lesotho

CIT

conditional in-kind transfer

CSG

Child Support Grant, South Africa

CT-OVC

Cash Transfer Programme for Orphans and Vulnerable Children, Kenya

DAP

Declaração de Aptidão ao Pronaf (Pronaf eligibility declaration), Brazil

FFA

Food for Asset Creation programme, Bangladesh

FISP

Farm Inputs Subsidy Programme, Malawi

FSVGD

Food Security Vulnerable Group Development programme, Bangladesh

G20

Group of Twenty Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors

GDP

gross domestic product

HABP

Household Asset Building Programme, Ethiopia

HGSF

Home-Grown School Feeding

HIV/AIDS

human immunodeficiency virus and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome

HSCT

Harmonized Social Cash Transfer, Zimbabwe

HSNP

Hunger Safety Net Programme, Kenya

ICN2

International Conference on Nutrition

IGVGD

Income Generating Vulnerable Group Development programme, Bangladesh

ILO

International Labour Organization

IPC-IG

International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth (UNDP)

IPP

institutional procurement programme

LEAP

Livelihood Empowerment against Poverty programme, Ghana

xi

LEWIE

Local Economy-wide Impact Evaluation

MDG

Millennium Development Goal

MGNREGA

Mahatma Ghandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, India

NGO

non-governmental organization

OFSP

Other Food Security Programme, Ethiopa

Oportunidades see PROGRESA
P4P

Purchase for Progress programme (WFP)

PAA

Programa de Aquisição de Alimentos (Food Acquisition Programme), Brazil

PAA Africa

Purchase from Africans for Africa Programme

PNAE

Programa Nacional de Alimentacão Escolar

PPP

purchasing power parity

PROGRESA

Programa de Educación, Salud y Alimentación, a conditional cash transfer
programme in Mexico, renamed (and slightly modified) Oportunidades in
2003 and Prospera in 2014

Pronaf

Programa Nacional de Fortalecimento da Agricultura Familiar (National
Programme for Strengthening Family Farming), Brazil

Prospera

see PROGRESA

PSNP

Productive Safety Net Programme, Ethiopia

PtoP

From Protection to Production project (FAO and UNICEF)

RMP

Rural Maintenance Programme

SCT

Social Cash Transfer, Malawi

SCTPP

Social Cash Transfer Pilot Programme, Ethiopia

SDG

Sustainable Development Goal

SPF

Social Protection Floor

TPDS

Targeted Public Distribution System, India

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

VGD

Vulnerable Group Development programme, Bangladesh

VUP

Vision 2020 Umurenge Programme, Rwanda

WFP

World Food Programme

WHO

World Health Organization

xii

Executive summary
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
on reducing poverty have been met by
many countries, yet many others lag behind
and the post-2015 challenge will be the full
eradication of poverty and hunger. Many
developing countries increasingly recognize
that social protection measures are needed to
relieve the immediate deprivation of people
living in poverty and to prevent others from
falling into poverty when a crisis strikes. Social
protection can also help recipients become
more productive by enabling them to manage
risks, build assets and undertake more
rewarding activities. These benefits spread
beyond the immediate recipients to their
communities and the broader economy as
recipients purchase food, agricultural inputs
and other rural goods and services.
But social protection can only offer a
sustainable pathway out of poverty if there
is inclusive growth in the economy. In most
low- and middle-income countries, agriculture
remains the largest employer of the poor and
is a major source of livelihoods through wage
labour and own production for household
consumption and the market. Poverty and
its corollaries – malnutrition, illness and lack
of education – limit agricultural productivity.
Hence, providing social protection and
pursuing agricultural development in an
integrated way offers synergies that can
increase the effectiveness of both.

than other rural households, especially in
sub-Saharan Africa. It is the poor’s reliance
on agriculture for their livelihoods and the
high share of their expenditure on food that
makes agriculture key to poverty and hunger
alleviation interventions.

Trends in poverty

What is social protection?

Although the shares of people living in
poverty and extreme poverty have declined
over the past three decades, the numbers
remain high, with almost one billion
people considered extremely poor and
another billion poor. Extreme poverty has
fallen substantially in many regions, especially
in East Asia and the Pacific as well as in South
Asia. In sub-Saharan Africa, little progress has
been made and almost half the population is
extremely poor.
Extreme poverty is disproportionately
concentrated in rural areas, and the rural
poor are more likely to rely on agriculture

Social protection encompasses initiatives
that provide cash or in-kind transfers to the
poor, protect the vulnerable against risks
and enhance the social status and rights of
the marginalized – all with the overall goal
of reducing poverty and economic and social
vulnerability. Social protection includes three
broad components: social assistance, social
insurance and labour market protection.
Social assistance programmes are publicly
provided conditional or unconditional
cash or in-kind transfers or public works
programmes. Social insurance programmes
are contributory programmes that provide

Why is poverty so persistent?
Poverty often begins with poor nutrition and
health, especially in early childhood: the poor
become trapped in vicious circles of hunger,
poor nutrition, ill health, low productivity
and poverty. Economic growth, especially
agricultural development, has been essential
for driving down poverty rates. However,
even with economic growth, the struggle to
escape from poverty is often slow as growth
may not be inclusive. For some groups, such
as children and the elderly, economic growth
may bring little relief or come too late to
prevent deprivation and lasting disadvantage.
The pathway out of poverty is difficult.
In addition, many non-poor households
are vulnerable to poverty when faced with
shocks of one kind or another. These shocks
cause many households to fall below the
poverty line because they suffer large income
losses and do not have sufficient savings to
buffer the shocks. Such shocks typically have
long-lasting negative impacts on the poor.

xiii

cover for designated contingencies affecting
household welfare or income. Labour market
programmes provide unemployment benefits,
build skills and enhance workers’ productivity
and employability.
Social protection programmes have
expanded rapidly over the past two decades.
Throughout the developing world, about
2.1 billion people, or one-third of the
population, receive some form of social
protection. There is wide variation among
regions, with coverage lowest in the regions
where poverty incidence is highest. This
report focuses on social assistance, by far the
most common form of social protection in
the developing world.

child malnutrition perpetuate poverty from
generation to generation.
Increased food consumption and greater
dietary diversity do not automatically
lead to improved nutrition outcomes.
Nutritional status depends on a number
of additional factors, including access to
clean water, sanitation and health care, as
well as appropriate child feeding and adult
dietary choices. Thus, for social assistance
programmes to improve nutrition outcomes,
they must be combined with complementary
interventions. Numerous agricultural
interventions, such as home gardening and
small livestock breeding, can also contribute
to improving nutrition.

Is social protection affordable?

The potential impact of social
protection on investment and
growth

Most countries, even the poorest, can afford
social protection programmes that could be
of significance in the fight against poverty.
Spending on such programmes has been low
relative to GDP. For more comprehensive
programmes, financing may require difficult
expenditure choices. Donor support will be
essential in the short-to-medium term for
maintaining programmes in some countries.
Yet, mobilizing domestic fiscal resources
from the outset are important in principle
and to establish a politically and financially
sustainable basis for social assistance
programmes. Pilot programmes and careful
monitoring and evaluation can help start the
policy dialogue needed to build a national
consensus on the nature, scale and financing
of social assistance within a country.

Social protection can help reduce
poverty and food insecurity
Social protection programmes are effective
in reducing poverty and hunger. In 2013,
social protection helped lift up to 150 million
people out of extreme poverty, that is,
those living on less than $1.25 a day. Social
protection allows households to increase
and diversify their food consumption, often
through increased own production. Positive
impacts on child and maternal welfare are
enhanced when programmes are gendersensitive or targeted at women. This is
especially important because maternal and

The livelihoods of most poor rural households
in the developing world are still based
on agriculture, particularly subsistence
agriculture. Many of these farmers live in
places where markets – for agricultural
inputs and outputs, labour, and other goods
and services such as credit and insurance
– are lacking or do not function well. The
uncertainties of weather, particularly with
accelerating climate change and the lack of
affordable insurance, are at the heart of the
vulnerabilities of households dependent on
agricultural livelihoods.
The time horizon of vulnerable agricultural
households is reduced because they focus on
survival. As a result, they are especially prone
to adopt low-risk, low-return agricultural
and other income-generating strategies,
and may seek to obtain liquidity or diversify
income sources in casual labour markets. For
similar reasons, households may underinvest
in the education and health of their children,
as well as adopt negative risk-coping
strategies such as distress sales of assets,
reducing the quantity and quality of food
consumption, begging or taking children out
of school, and exploiting natural resources in
an unsustainable manner.
Social protection can positively
influence the investment decisions of poor
households. It helps households manage
risk. Social protection provided at regular
and predictable intervals can increase

xiv

predictability and security for agricultural
households, partially substituting for
insurance and providing a crucial source of
liquidity. A growing body of evidence shows
that social assistance programmes not only
prevent households from falling into deeper
poverty and hunger when exposed to a shock
but, by helping the poor overcome liquidity
and credit constraints and manage risks more
effectively, it also allows them to invest in
productive activities and build assets.
The evidence shows that social protection
fosters more investment in the education
and health of children, and reduces child
labour, with positive implications for future
productivity and employability. When well
implemented, social protection can also
facilitate increased investment in farm
production activities, including inputs,
tools and livestock, as well as in non-farm
enterprises. Even relatively small transfers
help the poor overcome liquidity and credit
constraints and provide insurance against
some risks that deter them from pursuing
higher-return activities. The evidence is clear
that transfers also foster greater inclusion by
facilitating poor households’ participation
in, and contribution to, social networks,
which help households cope with risk and
play a supportive role in the social fabric of
communities.
Social protection does not reduce work
effort. But it does give beneficiaries greater
choice, and many shift time previously
dedicated to casual agricultural wage
employment of last resort to own-farm work
or non-farm employment. Taken together
with the increase in farm and non-farm
production activities, social protection
strengthens livelihoods rather than
fostering dependency.
Social protection has positive impacts on
local communities and economies. Public
works programmes can provide important
infrastructure and community assets and,
when designed and implemented properly,
contribute directly to the local economy.
Cash transfers increase the purchasing
power of the poor, who demand goods
and services largely produced in the local
economy. Moreover, such additional
income contributes to a virtuous circle of
local economic growth. Complementary
programmes may be necessary to reduce
supply-side constraints, thus preventing

significant price rises and increasing the
real-income and production impacts of the
programme.

Understanding what works:
implications for programme design
and implementation
Not all programmes are equally effective, and
their impacts can vary greatly, both in size
and in nature. Even among programmes that
appear quite similar, for example cash transfers
for the poor, differences in programme design
and implementation can lead to very different
outcomes. For example, targeting households
with fewer adults of working age will have
implications for labour impacts on livelihoods.

Targeting can help achieve programme
objectives at lower costs
Social protection programmes generally
have objectives that define the intended
beneficiaries. How well programmes can
achieve their objectives will depend, among
other things, on how well they reach their
target group. Social protection programmes
use a combination of targeting methods
to deliver larger and better transfers to
selected individuals or households. While
targeting can be an effective instrument for
reducing poverty and inequality, efficient
implementation is key and depends largely on
institutional capacity.

Level, timing and predictability of
transfers matter
Most social assistance transfers are designed
to cover the cost of a minimum basket of
food consumption; so, if additional impacts
are sought, then transfer levels should be
increased accordingly. The available data
show a wide variety of transfer levels, with
many countries providing average social
protection transfers to beneficiaries several
times greater than the poverty gap (at $1.25
a day), while in many of the poorest countries
transfers are well below what it would take
to close the gap.
Just as important, perhaps, are the timing
and predictability of transfers. Beneficiary
households will spend irregular lump
sum transfers differently than they would
predictable and regular transfers. If transfers
are not regular and reliable, it is difficult

xv

for households to plan and smoothen
consumption over time, and thus move
towards sustained change in the quantity
and quality of diets. Moreover, regularity
and reliability increase the time horizon of
beneficiary households, allowing them to
manage risks and shocks more effectively
and thus avoid “negative” coping strategies
and risk-averse production strategies
and, instead, increase risk-taking in more
profitable crops and/or activities. Regular and
reliable payments increase confidence and
creditworthiness, while reducing pressure on
informal insurance mechanisms.

Household-level factors and gender
influence programme impacts
Targeting criteria have strong implications for
the demographic characteristics of beneficiary
households, such as age of adults and
children, which condition the impact of the
programme. Households with more available
labour, for example, are in a better position
to take advantage of the cash for productive
investments, in both the short and longer run.
Women and men use transfers differently.
Many social protection programmes target
women because research shows that giving
women greater control over household
spending leads to greater expenditures on
food, health, education, children’s clothing
and nutrition. In addition, studies show that
the impacts of transfer programmes vary
with gender. For example, women and men
may not invest in the same type of livestock:
women generally focus on small animals
while men focus on larger livestock. Transfers
also impact men and women, and boys and
girls, differently in terms of labour allocation
and time use.

Markets matter too
The nature of the local economy also shapes
the type and extent of the prospective
productive impacts of cash transfer
programmes. In some rural areas, low
population density, illiquid markets, low levels
of public investment and inadequate public
infrastructure can pose particularly binding
constraints and make in-kind transfers more
effective. Where markets are more developed,
the effects of cash transfers on livelihood
strategies tend to be stronger. The importance
of market conditions varies with available
factors of production.

Social protection and agricultural
development
Notwithstanding its proven effectiveness,
social protection alone cannot sustainably
move people out of poverty and hunger.
Agriculture and social protection are
fundamentally linked in the context of
rural livelihoods. Poor and food-insecure
families depend primarily on agriculture
for their livelihoods, and make up a large
proportion of the beneficiaries of social
protection programmes. Stronger coherence
between agriculture and social protection
interventions can help protect the welfare
of poor, small-scale agriculturalists, helping
them manage risks more effectively and
improve agricultural productivity, leading to
more sustainable livelihoods and progress
out of poverty and hunger.
However, relatively few agricultural
interventions are coordinated or integrated
with social protection programmes.
Developing synergies is an opportunity,
but also a necessity, because of the difficult
public expenditure trade-offs implied by
constrained government budgets. It is not
only imperative to help the poorest meet
basic consumption needs, especially when
they are unable to work, but such help is
itself a foundation for gradual improvement
of the livelihoods of the poor. Leveraging
public expenditures on agriculture and social
protection programmes in support of each
other not only furthers this transformation,
but also strengthens agricultural and rural
development.

Options for combining agricultural
policies with social protection
A continuum of options exists for bringing
together and better coordinating social
protection and agricultural interventions
and policy. These options range from standalone, sector-specific social protection
or agricultural programmes, which are
designed to bring the two together in
integrated results in both sectors, to joint
programmes in which formal interventions
of both types are brought to bear on
specific target populations, and to
sectoral interventions that are aligned to
maximize complementarities and reduce
contradictions. Approaches can be combined
or sequenced in a variety of ways.

xvi

Social protection and agricultural input
subsidies
Input subsidies, in particular fertilizer
subsidies, have regained widespread
popularity in Africa, Asia, and Latin America
and the Caribbean, especially following the
sharp increases in food prices and fertilizer
costs in 2007–08. Insofar as input subsidy
programmes contribute to greater food
security through greater availability and
lower prices of staple goods, they also benefit
the poor, and are aligned with and contribute
to the objectives of social protection policies
and programmes. But, in general, such
programmes neither target nor reach the
poor.
Fertilizer subsidy programmes absorb
a large part of government agricultural
budgets in many countries. Linkages of these
single “stand-alone” input programmes with
social protection could include improving
the reach of input subsidies to the poorest
households by, for instance, improving
targeting and/or adjusting the size and type
of input packages to the specific needs of
the poorest small family farmers. Targeting
the poorest is best achieved through input
packages designed to meet their actual
needs. Another option is to combine these
programmes with social cash transfer
programmes that provide the poorest
beneficiaries with the additional liquidity
needed to pay for the “unsubsidized” part of
the input.
Credit to agriculture
Credit constraints are a major barrier to
agricultural investment. Relatively little
credit is allocated to agriculture and many
agricultural producers are credit-constrained.
In many countries, addressing credit market
failures – through special programmes, credit
guarantee schemes and specialized banks – is
a priority. Nearly all Asian, Latin American
and Caribbean countries, and a majority
of African countries, are taking measures
to facilitate the provision of credit to the
agriculture sector.
Directly targeting the poorest with (micro)
credit has proven difficult. There is increasing
evidence that, on its own, microcredit is
not sufficient to help poor households
exit poverty or to improve their welfare as
measured by consumption, health, education
and women’s empowerment.

Institutional procurement programmes
Lack of adequate markets is an important
limiting factor on agricultural growth and
rural development. So-called institutional
procurement programmes (IPPs) promote
rural development by creating a market for
small family farm produce. Interventions
that link social assistance with institutional
demand also typically focus on supporting
poorer small family farmers who are
constrained in their access to resources.
Brazil was the first country to develop an
institutional food procurement programme
by connecting development of guaranteed
demand for small family farm produce
with a food security strategy. The Brazilian
experience is being adapted to the African
context through the Purchase from Africans
for Africa programme. Home-grown schoolfeeding programmes, sometimes building on
the Purchase for Progress (P4P) programme
of the World Food Programme (WFP), are
an example of IPPs that are popular in many
countries.
Bringing the sectors together: the critical
issue of targeting
A fundamental operational issue to be
addressed in bringing the sectors together
is targeting interventions. The experience of
several countries shows that single or unified
registries or unified targeting systems are
particularly useful if several programmes
have overlapping objectives and target
populations.
While the effectiveness of specific
programmes is served by better targeting,
this need not contradict the universal
provision of some form of social protection
to all vulnerable people when they need it
to avoid long-lasting harm from external
shocks.

Key messages of the report
• Social protection programmes reduce
poverty and food insecurity. Effective
targeting and adequate transfers are
important determinants of success.
Social protection contributes to higher
incomes and food security not only by
ensuring increases in consumption, but
by enhancing a household’s ability to
produce food and augment income.

xvii

• Programmes targeted at women have
stronger food security and nutrition
impacts. Programmes that are gendersensitive, reduce women’s time
constraints and strengthen their control
over income enhance maternal and child
welfare. This is especially important
because maternal and child malnutrition
perpetuate poverty from generation to
generation.
• Social protection stimulates investment
in agricultural production and other
economic activities. Social protection
enhances nutrition, health and
education, with implications for future
productivity, employability, incomes
and well-being. Social protection
programmes that provide regular and
predictable transfers promote savings
and investment in both farm and
non-farm activities, and encourage
households to engage in more ambitious
activities offering higher returns.
• Social protection does not reduce work
effort. But it does give beneficiaries
greater choice, and many shift
time previously dedicated to casual
agricultural wage employment of
last resort to own-farm work or nonagricultural employment. Taken together
with the increase in farm and non-farm
production activities, social protection
strengthens livelihoods instead of
fostering dependency.
• Social protection has virtuous impacts
on local communities and economies.
Public works programmes can
provide important infrastructure and
community assets and, when designed
and implemented properly, contribute
directly to the local economy. Cash
transfers increase the purchasing power
of beneficiary households, who demand
goods and services, many of which
are produced or provided in the local
economy by non-beneficiary households.
Complementary programmes may
be necessary to reduce production
constraints to prevent inflation
and maximize the real-income and
production impacts of the programme.
• Social protection, by itself, is not enough
to move people out of poverty. As
poor households typically face multiple
constraints and risks, joint, coordinated

and/or aligned social protection and
agricultural programmes are likely
to be more effective in helping poor
households move out of poverty in a
sustainable manner.
• There are clear opportunities to
leverage social protection and
agriculture programmes to further rural
development. Developing synergies is an
opportunity and also a necessity because
of constrained government budgets. It
is imperative to help the poorest meet
basic consumption needs, especially
when they are unable to work. Such
help can itself become a foundation for
gradual improvement of the livelihoods
of the poor. Given that the majority
of the rural poor depend largely on
agriculture, agricultural interventions
are needed to overcome structural
supply-side bottlenecks holding back
growth. Leveraging public expenditures
on agriculture and social protection
programmes in support of each other not
only furthers this transformation, but also
serves to strengthen agricultural and rural
development.
• A national vision is needed of how
agriculture and social protection can
gradually move people out of poverty
and hunger. National vision and
commitment, supported by permanent
domestic resource mobilization, must
support coordinated action at the
national and subnational levels. Policy
and planning frameworks for rural
development, poverty reduction,
food security and nutrition need to
articulate the role of agriculture and
social protection in moving people out
of poverty and hunger, together with a
broader set of interventions. The type of
agricultural interventions combined with
social assistance depends on the context
and constraints, but must also consider
issues such as local implementation
capacities and available resources. In all
cases, interventions must be designed to
address a range of constraints to allow
the poorest to transform their livelihood
strategies to escape and remain out of
poverty.

Social protection
and agriculture:
breaking the cycle
of rural poverty

Cash transfers have helped this project beneficiary
take care of four children left orphaned by HIV/AIDS
in Ghana (© FAO/I.Grifi).

Beneficiaries of the Livelihood Empowerment
Against Poverty programme queue at a pay
point in Ghana’s Ga South Municipal District to
receive grants (© FAO/I.Grifi).
Farmers in a leper colony in India clearing a
local irrigation system with assistance provided
by an FAO project (© FAO/G. Bizzarri).
Primary school students get a healthy
breakfast in a rural school in Peru, part of a
national school feeding programme supported
by FAO (© FAO/I. Camblor).

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

1. Social protection
and agriculture to break
the cycle of rural poverty

Hundreds of millions of rural families are
trapped in a cycle of hunger, poverty and
low productivity that causes unnecessary
suffering and impedes agricultural
development and broader economic growth.
Breaking this cycle requires actions in two
complementary domains: social protection
and growth in the productive sectors of the
economy. As agriculture remains the most
important productive sector for rural people
in many developing countries, linking social
protection with agricultural development is a
potentially powerful means of breaking the
cycle of rural poverty.
Many developing countries increasingly
recognize that social protection measures
are needed to relieve the immediate
deprivation of people living in poverty and
to prevent others from falling into poverty
when a crisis strikes. Social protection can
also help recipients become more productive
by enabling them to manage risks, build
assets and undertake more remunerative
activities. These benefits spread beyond the
immediate recipients to their communities
and the broader economy as recipients
purchase food, agricultural inputs and other
rural goods and services. Social protection
measures can also ease the economic and
social dislocations that accompany economic
growth and agricultural transformation,
reducing social and economic inequalities,
promoting decent work and fostering

inclusive and sustainable growth. But social
protection can only offer a sustainable
pathway out of poverty if there is growth
in the economy. In most low- and middleincome countries, agriculture remains
the largest employer of the poor and is a
major source of livelihoods through wage
labour and own production for household
consumption and the market. Poverty and
its corollaries – malnutrition, illness and lack
of education – limit agricultural productivity.
Hence, addressing social protection and
agricultural development in an integrated
way offers synergies that can increase the
effectiveness of both.
This edition of The State of Food and
Agriculture makes the case that social
protection measures will help break the
cycle of rural poverty and vulnerability,
when combined with broader agricultural
and rural development measures. This
introductory chapter provides a conceptual
framework that highlights the linkages
among social protection, rural household
consumption and production, and poverty
alleviation. It focuses on rural poverty and
emphasizes the importance of agriculture
and agricultural development as the primary
pathways out of poverty for millions of
family farms. It briefly introduces concepts
related to social protection and summarizes
related recent trends in low- and middleincome countries.

3

4

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Subsequent chapters review evidence
regarding social protection and agriculture.
Although few studies have directly examined
the linkages between social protection and
agriculture, many rigorous impact evaluations
have been conducted on social protection
programmes in rural contexts (Box 1).
These provide a robust body of evidence
on three key issues: (i) the effectiveness of
social protection measures in alleviating
deprivation and food insecurity among
the poor, (ii) the extent to which social
protection enhances the productive potential
of poor agricultural households, and (iii)
the extent to which the benefits received by
programme participants generates incomes
that can “spill over” into the local economy
and community. The report evaluates the
factors that contribute to the heterogeneity
of programme impacts and discusses what
they imply for programme design and how
agricultural policies can be tied in with social
protection programmes more directly. It
concludes with a discussion of policy and
governance recommendations.

Linking poverty, social protection
and agriculture
Figure 1 illustrates the conceptual linkages
among rural poverty, social protection
and agriculture. It begins with a stylized
rural household at the centre that makes
decisions about what to produce and
consume based on the initial quantity
and quality of livelihood resources the
household controls or has access to and the
expected revenue from multiple economic
activities, as well as private and public
transfers. Household livelihood resources
are often described as comprising five
types of assets/resources: physical, human,
social, financial and natural. Physical assets
for a typical rural household engaged in
agriculture may include land, machinery
and livestock. Human resources include
the health, nutrition and education status
of all family members, which together
determine the family’s ability to work and
earn incomes. For many poor households,
human resources are their main source of
income. Social resources refer to networks –
such as reciprocal friendship and kinship ties,
funeral and savings associations, producer

groups and other community groups – that
enable the household to manage risk and
engage with the wider community. Financial
assets include household savings and access
to formal and informal sources of credit.
Natural resources relate to the quality and
stability of the natural environment, such as
soil, water and climate conditions.
For most rural households, especially small
family farms, production and consumption
decisions are closely intertwined, with the
family providing most of the labour used
on the farm, and consuming part of the
output for its own needs. These household
production and consumption decisions
determine the levels of household income,
savings and investment. These, in turn, link
households to markets through the sales and
purchases of food, inputs, labour and other
goods and services. These household and
market activities, in turn, influence the stock
of physical and financial household assets,
allowing them to accumulate in good times or
requiring them to liquidate assets to survive.
Social protection programmes and
agricultural interventions influence
household decision-making processes at
several different points. Social protection
measures, such as cash or in-kind transfers,
can directly enhance the human resources
and productivity of recipients by enabling
them, for example, to consume healthier
diets, access appropriate medical care
and take advantage of educational
opportunities. By relaxing credit and
liquidity constraints, social protection
transfers can enable households to invest
in new and more productive activities and
to build assets and enhance resources.
When transfers are regular and predictable,
they can enable recipients to undertake
investments that may otherwise be too risky.
Formal social protection measures can relieve
pressure on informal insurance mechanisms
and social reciprocal networks under stress.
As social protection measures change
the production, consumption and
entrepreneurial activities of recipient
households, these activities will have spillover
effects on the local economy by stimulating
demand for local goods and services. At the
same time, agricultural interventions can
promote productivity growth by addressing
constraints that limit poor households’ access
to land and water resources, inputs, financial

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

BOX 1
Impact evaluation and social protection
Impact evaluation of government social
protection policies and programmes aims
to measure success in achieving their stated
objectives, as well as unintended effects
and outcomes. By allowing for a more
systematic evaluation, impact evaluations
contribute to the wider policy debate
and help articulate social protection as
part of rural/agricultural development
strategies. Findings from impact evaluations
also provide insights regarding the costeffectiveness of different programmes and
the efficacy of targeting methods, as well as
problems that may arise in implementation.
Impact evaluations generally use mixed
methods, comprising both qualitative and
quantitative assessments. Quantitative
impact evaluations are motivated by the
question of how beneficiaries would fare in
the absence of the programme. As it is not
possible to observe beneficiaries with and
without the programme simultaneously,
a key element of impact evaluation is to
identify a “counterfactual”. In practice, a
counterfactual typically comprises a group
of individuals and households similar to
those benefiting from the social protection
programme who do not themselves benefit
from the programme. Comparing the
behaviour of the two groups over time helps
establish the causal effects of the programme
with statistical validity. Qualitative
methods, such as focus group and key
informant discussions, are also an integral
part of well-designed impact evaluations.
Qualitative methods explore perceptions
and experiences of beneficiaries and nonbeneficiaries, as well as other stakeholders,
and are used to explore issues that cannot be
addressed with quantitative instruments.
Social protection programmes, and in
particular cash transfers, have been more
consistently and systematically evaluated,
using rigorous impact evaluation techniques,
than almost any other government
programme in the developing world. First
in Latin America and the Caribbean, and
more recently in sub-Saharan Africa, both
conditional and unconditional cash transfer
programmes have been evaluated, using

random control trials or quasi-experimental
designs combined with qualitative methods
(Davis et al., 2012; Handa and Davis, 2006).
Recently, the From Protection to Production
project,1 a joint effort of FAO and the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
introduced the use of village general
equilibrium models in mixed-method impact
evaluations of seven government-run cash
transfer programmes in sub-Saharan Africa
in order to calculate the income multipliers
generated by these programmes.
These impact evaluations have had a clear
impact on programme and policy design, as
well on as the larger national, regional and
global policy debates on social protection.
Results from the impact evaluations have
had concrete and immediate implications
for programme implementation in terms
of targeting, types/size and timing of
transfers and messaging accompanying the
transfers. In sub-Saharan Africa, the impact
evaluations changed the national policy
narrative on cash transfer programmes,
providing credibility to cash transfers and
the larger social protection agenda. The
results secured broader acceptance of
cash transfers, particularly by ministries
of finance. Social protection is now
recognized as developmental instead of
simply as assistance, with little evidence
for concerns about dependency (Davis
et al., forthcoming). In Mexico, results
from the pioneering impact evaluation of
PROGRESA/Oportunidades/Prospera2 played
an important role in improving programme
implementation and in ensuring the shortterm sustainability and expansion of the
programme (Behrman, 2007).
1

2

The “From Protection to Production” project is a
multi-country impact evaluation of cash transfers
in sub-Saharan Africa. The project is a collaborative
effort between FAO, UNICEF Eastern and Southern
Africa Regional Office, and the Governments of
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Zambia
and Zimbabwe.
Mexico’s Programa de Educación, Salud y
Alimentación (PROGRESA) was introduced in 1997,
and renamed (and slightly modified) Oportunidades
in 2003 and Prospera in 2014.

Source: From Protection to Production team, FAO.

5

6

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

FIGURE 1
Social protection linkages to household consumption and production activities and the local economy

The impacts of social
protection and agricultural
interventions are conditioned
by:
• Gender
• Agroclimatic conditions

Households make
decisions on consumption
and production based on
the level and quality of the
resources they control and
the constraints they face.

Consumption
activities

• Economic context (prices,
infrastructure, markets)

Interaction
with local
economy and
community:

• Social context (community,
culture)
• Services

Rural household resources:
• Physical – land, machinery, livestock

Social protection and agricultural
interventions address threats and constraints
to consumption and production

Social protection
impacts on
household incomes,
consumption
and production
decisions and
implementation,
as well as market
demand and
constraints.

Agricultural
interventions
are needed to
address structural
constraints. These
may include land
reform, extension,
irrigation,
microfinance,
infrastructure,
inputs, etc.

• Human – labour, nutrition,
education, health
• Social – networks, labour sharing
• Financial – formal and informal
credit, savings
• Natural – soil, water, air

• Markets
for goods,
inputs,
factors of
production,
labour,
financial
services
• Social
networks
• Health and
education
services

Income/own
production:
• Savings

Production
activities

• Investment
• Consumption

Source: FAO.

services, advisory services and markets. Such
interventions to ease supply-side constraints
are also needed to help transform increased
local demand due to social protection into
local economic growth, rather than inflation.
In this sense, agricultural interventions and
social protection are complementary, meeting
people’s basic needs and enabling them to
take advantage of opportunities to become
more productive, while also facilitating
market-based activities, thus creating
a virtuous circle of human well-being,
agricultural growth and economic security.

Poverty, rural poverty and
agriculture
The Millennium Development Goal (MDG)
poverty target has been met by many
countries; yet, many others lag behind.
Poverty remains so deeply entrenched

in the rural areas of many low-income
countries that it slows economic and social
progress. The post-2015 challenge will be
to eradicate poverty. In South Asia and
sub-Saharan Africa, where the majority of
men and women depend on agriculture
for their livelihoods (FAO, 2011), average
family farms are small and getting smaller
(FAO, 2014a), capital investment per farm
worker has been flat or declining for three
decades (FAO, 2012), and agricultural
extension advisory and support services
for production and diversification are
inadequate (FAO, 2014a). This section
provides a brief profile of rural poverty to
illustrate both the importance of agriculture
to the livelihood strategies of the rural poor
and the inability of agricultural or other
productive-sector interventions alone to
reach the poorest family farms. Analysing
vulnerability and understanding poverty are
critical for social protection.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

FIGURE 2
Number of people and shares of population living in poverty in low- and
middle-income countries
Percentage

Billions
3

80

60
2
40
1
20

0

0
1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

1999

2002

2005

2008

2011

Number of people living on between $1.25 and $2.00 per day (right-hand axis)
Number of people living in extreme poverty (right-hand axis)
Share of population living in extreme poverty (left-hand axis)
Share of population living in poverty (left-hand axis)
Note: The figure refers to the international poverty lines of $1.25 a day (extreme poverty) and $2.00 a day (poverty)
as measured in constant 2005 PPP dollars.
Source: Authors’ compilation using World Bank (2015a). See Annex table A1.

Trends in poverty
More than one-third of all people in low- and
middle-income countries are poor, defined
as living on less than $2.00 a day.1 One in six
is extremely poor, living on less than $1.25
a day (Figure 2 and Annex table A1) (World
Bank, 2015a) and about 780 million people
are suffering from chronic hunger (FAO, IFAD
and WFP, 2015a). Although the shares of
people living in poverty and extreme poverty
have declined substantially over the past
three decades, the numbers remain high,
with almost one billion people considered
extremely poor and another billion poor, as
defined by the World Bank (2015a).
Extreme poverty has fallen substantially in
many regions, especially in East Asia and the
Pacific as well as in South Asia. In sub-Saharan
Africa, little progress has been made and
almost half the population is extremely poor
(Figure 3 and Annex table A1). Sub-Saharan
Africa accounts for about half the world’s

extreme poor and about two-thirds of the
world’s ultra-poor, with the latter referring to
those living on less than half the $1.25 a day
extreme poverty line (Barrett, 2011).

Patterns of rural poverty
Extreme poverty is disproportionately
concentrated in rural areas. The World Bank
estimates that, by 2010, 78 percent of the
extreme poor were living in rural areas
(World Bank, 2015b). This pattern of mainly
rural deprivation is common across regions
despite differences in overall poverty rates
(Figure 4). The relative deprivation in rural
areas is reflected in a wide range of socioeconomic welfare indicators. For example,
child malnutrition, as measured by the
prevalence of underweight in children under
five years of age, is worse in rural areas in
virtually every country for which data are
available (Annex table A1).

Agriculture and poverty
$1.25 and $2.00 a day refer to international poverty
lines, with dollars measured in constant 2005 PPP dollars
(denoted by the symbol $ throughout this report).
1

Agriculture and rural poverty are closely
related and often reflect the gendered nature
of economic and social relations. Agriculture

7

8

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

FIGURE 3
Shares of the population in low- and middle-income countries living in extreme
poverty, by region
Percentage
80

60

40

20

0
1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

1999

2002

2005

2008

East Asia and the Pacific

Europe and Central Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

Middle East and North Africa

South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

2011

All low- and middle-income countries
Note: The figure refers to the international (extreme) poverty line of $1.25 a day as measured in constant 2005 PPP dollars.
Source: Authors’ compilation using World Bank (2015a). See Annex table A1.

generates about 10 percent of gross domestic
product (GDP) in low- and middle-income
countries, and employs about 45 percent
of the total labour force (paid and unpaid
workers in formal and informal employment,
including on-farm family labour). These figures
mean that the value of output per worker
is much lower in agriculture than in other
sectors, implying low incomes for people who
depend on agriculture for their livelihoods.
The shares of agriculture in the economy and
in employment are typically high in lowerincome countries of Central America, South
Asia, sub-Saharan Africa and other regions
where poverty rates remain high.
Women supply 43 percent of all
agricultural labour in low- and middleincome countries. This share reaches at least
half in many countries of sub-Saharan Africa
and elsewhere, especially where poverty is
particularly entrenched and women have
few other employment opportunities.
But women farmers face a number of
constraints in accessing agricultural
inputs, services and markets that make
it particularly hard for them to rely on

agricultural production as a pathway out of
poverty (Quisumbing et al., 2014).
Rural people in most developing countries,
but especially in sub-Saharan Africa, rely
on agriculture for an important share of
their incomes, although they may engage in
many income-generating activities (World
Bank, 2007). And for poor agricultural
households, income from on-farm activities is
relatively more important than it is for other
agricultural households (Figure 5, p. 10). In
Ghana, for example, food producers make up
43 percent of the population, but account for
69 percent of the headcount poor (Al-Hassan
and Poulton, 2009). In sub-Saharan Africa,
almost three-quarters of the economically
active rural population are small family
farmers who produce a significant share of
their own food consumption: many of them
are poor or extremely poor (Barrett, 2011).
Family farms are the backbone of
agriculture in low- and middle-income
countries, but many family farms are small
and poor. Almost 75 percent of farms in lowand middle-income countries are smaller
than one hectare (Annex table A2). This

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

means that more than 375 million family
farms in the developing world have less than
one hectare of land (FAO, 2014a).
Figure 6 (p. 11) clearly shows that
agricultural households have a diverse array
of income sources, and that dependence on
own production varies inversely with farm
size. That is, the smallest farms depend on
own production for a smaller share of total
income than do larger farms. Of course, this
does not mean that agricultural production
is unimportant to them. On the contrary,
crop and livestock production contributes
40 percent or more of total household
income for the smallest farm size category in
most countries for which data are available.
Own production also contributes a large
share of the food consumption of households
in this category, and could contribute even
more if they were better able to invest and
diversify. Figure 6 also shows the importance
of non-farm income and transfers and
remittances for all farm size categories.

The poorest farming households are net
food buyers, and food makes up a large
share of the household budgets of the poor,
whether or not they farm. In particular,
the ultra-poor spend about 65–80 percent
of total household expenditure on food
(Ahmed et al., 2007). Food price increases
therefore have a dramatic effect on the
poor and poorest, especially because most
are net food buyers (Zezza et al., 2008;
World Bank, 2007). It is the poor’s reliance
on agriculture for their livelihoods and the
high share of their expenditure on food that
makes agriculture key to poverty and hunger
alleviation interventions.

Why is poverty so persistent?
As discussed above, despite progress in many
regions, poverty rates remain stubbornly
high in many countries, especially in
rural areas. Economic growth, especially

FIGURE 4
Share of rural and urban populations in low- and middle-income countries living
in extreme poverty (less than $1.25 a day), by region

East Asia and the Pacific (8)

15.5%

2.9%
1.9%
0.5%

Europe and Central Asia (9)

6.4%
2.5%

Latin America and the Caribbean (15)

5.1%
2.0%

Middle East and North Africa (5)
South Asia (6)

21.2%

26.7%

Sub-Saharan Africa (28)

52.0%

28.8%

Low- and middle-income countries (71)

25.4%

10.4%

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Percentage

Rural

Urban

Notes: Rural and urban poverty rates, using international poverty lines, are not available for most countries. Here, they are
estimated using available poverty data and following methods described in IFAD (2010) for all countries except China, India
and Indonesia. That is, at the country level, the incidence of rural poverty, using international poverty lines, is estimated
using (a) national poverty headcount rates based on international poverty lines and (b) rural and urban poverty headcount
ratios using national poverty lines. For China, India and Indonesia, rural and urban poverty rates that use international
poverty lines are available, and were therefore used for the regional estimates. In all cases, the most recent poverty
information available for the period 2005 –12 was used.
Sources: Authors’ calculations using World Bank (2015a) and World Bank (2015c).

9

East Asia and
the Pacific

Cambodia (2004)

Europe and
Central Asia

FIGURE 5
Shares of income from on-farm activities by poorest and richest agricultural
households in selected low- and middle-income countries

Albania (2005)

Indonesia (2000)
Viet Nam (2002)

Bulgaria (2001)
Tajikistan (2007)

South Asia

Latin America and
the Caribbean

Bolivia (Plurinational
State of) (2005)
Ecuador (1998)
Guatemala (2006)
Nicaragua (2005)
Panama (2003)
Bangladesh (2005)
Nepal (2003)
Pakistan (2001)
Ghana (2005)
Kenya (2005)

Sub-Saharan Africa

10

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Madagascar (2001)
Malawi (2011)
Niger (2011)
Nigeria (2010)
Uganda (2012)
United Republic of
Tanzania (2009)
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Percentage

Poorest quintile

Richest quintile

Note: On-farm activities include crop and livestock production but not agricultural wages, following Davis, Di Giuseppe and
Zezza (2014). Agricultural households are those households holding a positive amount of agricultural land.
Sources: Authors’ calculations using household survey data. For a list of all surveys consulted, see Household Survey
references at the end of the report (p. 127).

agricultural development, has been essential
for driving down poverty rates; strong
economic growth helped reduce the global
poverty rate from 46 to 27 percent between
1990 and 2005 (UN, 2011a). In China, for
example, poverty and hunger have fallen

dramatically as a result of strong, broadbased growth that started in agriculture.
Elsewhere, notably in countries where
agriculture represents a large share of GDP
and employment, growth originating in
agriculture has been particularly effective in

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

Latin America and
the Caribbean

Europe and
Central Asia

East Asia and
the Pacific

FIGURE 6
Average share of income earned by agricultural households, by source and farm
size quartile

Cambodia
2004

Albania
2005

Tajikistan
2007
Bolivia
(Plurinational
State of)
2005
Nicaragua
2005

South Asia

Bangladesh
2005

Nepal
2003

Pakistan
2001

Sub-Saharan Africa

Ethiopia
2012

Kenya
2005

Niger
2011

Uganda
2012

1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile
1st quartile
2nd quartile
3rd quartile
4th quartile

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Percentage

Crop and livestock production

Agricultural wages

Non-farm income

Transfers, remittances and other non-labour income

Notes: Agricultural households are those households operating a positive amount of agricultural land. The first quartile is
the smallest farm size category and the fourth quartile is the largest.
Sources: Authors’ calculations using household survey data. For a list of all surveys consulted, see Household Survey
references at the end of the report (p. 127).

11

12

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

raising the incomes of the poor (World Bank,
2007; Christiaensen, Demery and Kuhl, 2011).
Lifting the incomes of the rural poor
above the extreme poverty line of $1.25 a
day would require average increases of at
least 60 percent in sub-Saharan Africa and
at least 30 percent in Asia (particularly in
China and India) from the average incomes
of the poor estimated in 2010 (World Bank,
2015b). For the poorest, these income
gaps are even larger. On an annual basis,
implied per capita income growth would be
3 percent per year to raise average incomes
by 60 percent between 2015 and 2030,
and by 4.4 percent per year to double the
incomes of the poorest (Yoshida, Uematsu
and Sobrado, 2014). These per capita income
growth rates are higher than those achieved
in most low-income countries over the past
decades, and many of the poorest have seen
even less income growth (Vakis, Rigolini and
Lucchetti, 2015).
Growth in agriculture is part of a
wider process of economic development
accompanied by dramatic changes in
agriculture. Where economic growth
and urbanization have occurred, they
are mirrored by the reduction in the
number of people engaged in agriculture
and the rising productivity of labour in
agricultural production. For example, in
China, urbanization rose from 28 percent in
1990 to 53 percent in 2012, while the value
of agricultural output per economically
active person in agriculture rose from 416
to 1 024 dollars over the same time period
(FAO, 2015a).2 Apart from the massive
changes in employment, the agriculture
sector also has to respond to changes in
demand that accompany rising incomes
and changing lifestyles. These responses are
embodied in changing technologies; greater
commercialization is also reflected in changes
to retailing, storage and marketing, and
reorganization of farming to exploit more
effectively the emerging economies of scale
(Collier and Dercon, 2009). These changes
take a long time and although highly
beneficial from an economic point of view,
they also cause dislocation and hardship for
many.

2
The value of agricultural output is measured in constant
international dollars net of seed and feed use.

Where growth has been slower, this
structural transformation of agriculture has
stalled, leaving many in poverty. However,
even with economic growth, the struggle
to escape poverty is often slow. In many
countries, such as India, households build
physical and financial assets very slowly
(Naschold, 2012). In part, this is because
households adopt livelihood strategies
that leave them less exposed to risk, but
that earn lower returns (Dercon and
Christiaensen, 2011). For example, Carter
(1997) found that households were willing
to give up 20 percent of their income
to ensure food availability. This tradeoff between food security and higher
incomes is greater for poorer households
(Alderman and Paxson, 1992; Rosenzweig
and Binswanger, 1993). Natural and humaninduced shocks push households into
poverty, or more deeply into poverty, often
forcing them to liquidate assets.
Moreover, growth may not be inclusive.
For some groups, such as children and
the elderly, economic growth may bring
little relief or come too late to prevent
deprivation and lasting disadvantage. Other
people, with limited access to economic
opportunities, risk being trapped in chronic
poverty. Several factors conspire to create
“poverty traps” that keep the poorest
poor. For example, they may be too poor
to consume the basic amount of nutrients
needed for productive work, or to invest in
education, or to accumulate the resources
needed for entrepreneurship. Their farms
may be too small to qualify for formal credit
and insurance. Such constraints may leave
many households below critical thresholds
in terms of assets and resources, incomes
or expenditures that they are unable to
overcome.
The pathway out of poverty is also not
smooth. In addition to the poor, many
non-poor households are vulnerable3 to
poverty when faced with shocks of one kind

3
Although poverty and vulnerability are related they are
not the same. Poverty is determined by net incomes, often
reflecting current assets or capabilities, while vulnerability is
a broader and more dynamic concept concerned with the
factors that determine possible income changes and future
poverty status (UNICEF, 2012). The World Development
Report 2000/01 on “Attacking Poverty” also includes an
extensive discussion of the concepts and possible indicators
(World Bank, 2001).

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

BOX 2
Vulnerability of fisherfolk is pronounced
Around 58.3 million people are estimated
to be engaged in the fishery sector
(capture fisheries and aquaculture)
(FAO, 2014b), 90 percent of whom are
engaged in small-scale activities (Mills
et al., 2011). These include self-employed
fishers (who own their own boat and/
or fishing gear) and boat crew members
(contracted by boat owners to operate
or work on their boats), as well as
households who engage in fishing as part
of a larger portfolio of (often on-farm)
livelihood activities. The large majority
live and operate in low- and middleincome countries (FAO, 2014b). About
three times as many people work in fish
processing and trading (World Bank/FAO/
WorldFish, 2012). Overall, small-scale
fisheries and related activities are an
important, but underestimated, source of
employment, food security and income.
Poverty among those employed in
fisheries remains widespread globally.
But the link between fisheries and
income poverty is complex (Jentoft and
Eide, 2011). In many instances, fishing
communities may be as well off as
neighbouring (farming) communities,
leading some to raise the question of
whether fishers are especially poor, or
vulnerable to poverty (see Béné, 2009).

or another (see also Box 2). These shocks
cause many households to fall below the
poverty line because they incur large income
losses and do not have sufficient savings to
buffer the shock. For example, as a result
of the fuel, food and financial crises, some
64 million more people around the world
were expected to be living on less than $1.25
a day by the end of 2010 than would have
been the case without the crisis (World Bank,
2010).
In some countries and regions, such
as the Sahel, rainfall variability, land
degradation and desertification contribute to
vulnerability and poverty. Climate change is
set to worsen these stresses over the coming
decades, making poverty reduction even
more of a challenge.

Their poverty is often related to the severe
degree of geographical and/or political
isolation that characterizes many fulltime fishing or mixed fishing–farming
communities. As their incomes depend
largely on their catch – which is usually
highly variable – fishers’ incomes are
generally variable and unpredictable.
The exposure and sensitivity of fisheriesdependent communities to risks are
relatively high in comparison with other
socio-economic groups, while their ability
to cope with or recover from external
shocks is relatively low. Fisherfolk may
be exposed to greater physical risks,
depending on the nature of the fishery
resources, their catch methods, the socioeconomic context, climate-change-induced
risks (rising sea levels, impacts of flood
or tropical storms), fluctuations in fish
stocks, health risks (bilharzia, malaria),
market risks (currency devaluations, fuel
prices), and political and security risks
(theft, interethnic or intercountry conflict),
among others.

Source: Béné, Devereux and Roelen, 2014.

There is evidence of considerable mobility
into and out of poverty as households suffer
the effects of shocks and then recover (Van
Campenhout and Dercon, 2012). For data
from Punjab, Sind and North-West Frontier
Province in Pakistan, Baulch and McCullough
(1998) find that between 1986/87 and
1990/91, 21 and 29 percent of households,
respectively, had incomes below the poverty
line, but 46–51 percent of poor households
exited poverty from one year to the next
while only 3 percent of households were
poor during all five years of the period.4

4
Krishna (2004), Krishna et al. (2004) and Krishna et al.
(2006) document considerable mobility in and out of
poverty in villages in northern India, western Kenya and
central and western Uganda, respectively.

13

14

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

However, recovery from shocks is often slow.
For example, after the 1984–85 famine in
Ethiopia, rural households took ten years, on
average, to rebuild livestock holdings to the
levels existing before the famine (Dercon,
2008); evidence from rural China shows that
the speed of recovery from an income shock
is slower for the poor than for the non-poor
(Jalan and Ravallion, 2001).
Poverty often begins with poor nutrition
and health, especially in early childhood:
the poor are caught in vicious circles of
hunger, poor nutrition, ill health, low
productivity and poverty. Poor maternal
and infant nutrition and health result
in low birth weight and stunting as well
as impaired cognitive development and
lower school attainment (Alderman, 2010;
Hoddinott et al., 2013). Empirical evidence
clearly shows that childhood stunting
reduces adult productivity and, hence,
wages (Strauss and Thomas, 1998; Hunt,
2005). More insidiously, stunted girls grow
up to become stunted mothers; maternal
stunting is one of the strongest predictors
of giving birth to a low-birth-weight infant.
Maternal and child malnutrition thus
perpetuate the cycle of poverty. These poor
initial conditions are difficult to overcome,
and leave households vulnerable to shocks
that have significant and persistent effects,
but cannot be fully insured against (Barrett
and McPeak, 2006).
Households adopt a wide variety of
livelihood strategies to manage and cope
with risk. They also use burial and funeral
societies and informal credit and savings
schemes to avoid consumption fluctuations.
But there is extensive evidence showing
that such informal arrangements are more
effective for idiosyncratic shocks, such as
illness, that affect individual households
than covariate shocks, such as drought or
flooding, that affect entire communities; at
any rate, they offer only partial insurance
to the poor (Devereux, 1999; Dercon,
2011). For example, Dercon, Hoddinott and
Woldehanna (2005) found that poverty
in Ethiopia in 2004 was about 50 percent
higher than it would have been in the
absence of shocks. And in the United
Republic of Tanzania, Beegle, Dehejia and
Gatti (2006) found that household income
shocks increased the level of child labour, as
school enrolment suffered.

As noted above, most of the poorest
live in rural areas, derive large shares of
their incomes from agricultural activities
and produce significant shares of their
own food. Invariably, the poor also spend
large proportions of their incomes on
food. For these reasons, social protection
interventions in rural areas with a focus on
food and agriculture are particularly relevant
in the fight against poverty and hunger.
Recent research has also shown potentially
important synergies between agriculture and
social protection, but, until recently, these
links have received relatively little attention
from development practitioners and policymakers (Tirivayi, Knowles and Davis, 2013).
Weather-related risks, in particular, often
fundamentally determine rural livelihoods
and explain why poor households remain
poor (Alderman and Haque, 2007). Among
the poorest quintile of farmers in semi-arid
parts of India, for example, a one standard
deviation reduction in weather-related
risk would raise average profits by up to
35 percent (Rosenzweig and Binswanger,
1993). Similarly, farmers in Shinyanga, a semiarid district in the western part of the United
Republic of Tanzania, with limited options
to maintain adequate consumption after a
shock, were found to choose lower-return,
but safer, crops such as sweet potatoes,
foregoing up to 20 percent of potential
income as a kind of implicit insurance
premium (Dercon, 1996). In Ethiopia (Elbers,
Gunning and Pan, 2009) and Zimbabwe
(Elbers, Gunning and Kinsey, 2007), the
capital stock accumulated by farmers was
estimated to be only 36 and 46 percent,
respectively, of the level achievable in the
absence of risk.
Shocks can have long-lasting impacts on
the poor. For example, households affected
by drought in Ethiopia and the United
Republic of Tanzania had lower incomes
than unaffected households even ten years
later (Beegle, De Weerdt and Dercon, 2008;
Dercon, 2008). In the absence of insurance,
rural households that experience shocks
may reduce consumption or sell assets. But
reducing consumption to preserve productive
assets in the short run can irreversibly
harm long-term physical and cognitive
development of the youngest and most
vulnerable members of a household. Dercon
and Porter (2010), for example, found that

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

children in the particularly vulnerable age
range of 12–36 months at the height of the
1984 Ethiopian famine were about 3 cm
shorter due to the famine.

What is social protection?
Without public assistance, many of the
poor and vulnerable will suffer unnecessary
hardship and lasting deprivation,
perpetuating poverty for future generations.
In developing countries, successful
experiences with large-scale programmes
that help the poor and vulnerable, for
example in Brazil, Ethiopia, India and Mexico,
have given impetus to a reassessment of
the value and role of such programmes in
combating poverty and hunger, as well as
social, economic and political inequality.
There has been a rapid expansion of social
protection programmes in the last two
decades (see Chapter 2).
The concept of social protection emerged
in response to the “social safety nets”5
discourse and agenda of the 1980s and 1990s
(HLPE, 2012). Initially seen as a response to
shocks, over time, and also in response to the
inadequacy of formal social security systems,
especially following structural adjustment
policies and fiscal crises in many developing
countries in the 1980s and 1990s, the notion
has broadened to also address chronic
poverty. Some approaches are strongly
normative, based on the concept of social
protection as a right, as stipulated in many
United Nations documents, while others
focus more on the role of social protection in
protecting the vulnerable, reducing poverty
and promoting economic growth. Some
approaches to social protection emphasize its
role in helping poor people escape poverty,
while others emphasize its role in promoting
social inclusion and social justice, as well as
ensuring income security, quality education
and health care for all.
There is no single definition of social
protection, but a broadly representative
definition is “all public and private initiatives

5
Some organizations and agencies, for example UNICEF,
use the term “social safety nets” to refer to temporary
or short-term programmes and “social transfers” for the
broader set of transfers that are only one component of
social protection.

that provide income or consumption
transfers to the poor, protect the vulnerable
against livelihood risks, and enhance the
social status and rights of the marginalised;
with the overall objective of reducing the
economic and social vulnerability of poor,
vulnerable and marginalised groups”
(Devereux and Sabates-Wheeler, 2004, p. 9).6
In line with this definition, social protection
instruments are frequently interpreted as
being preventive, protective, promotive and
transformative.
Social protection can play a protective role
in providing means (cash or in-kind) to access
food and mitigate the impact of shocks. It
can have a preventive function in averting
deeper deprivation by strengthening
resilience against shocks and preventing
loss of incomes and assets. It can support
the accumulation of resources to sustain
livelihoods (e.g. through asset transfers and
public works). Social protection can also play
a promotive function by directly supporting
investments in human resources (nutrition,
health, education and skills development)
and by reducing liquidity constraints and
income insecurity to induce investments in
farm and non-farm activities. It can also have
a transformative function in the lives of the
poor through reorienting their focus beyond
day-to-day survival towards investments
for future, by shifting power relations
within households (as social protection can
empower women) and by strengthening the
capabilities and capacities of the poor to
empower themselves.
Although there is still debate in some
circles over the nature of the concept, it
is generally agreed that social protection
includes three broad components: social
assistance, social insurance and labour
market protection (Barrientos, 2014; World
Bank, 2014, UN, 2011b). This categorization is
used in this report.
Social assistance programmes are taxfinanced, i.e. publicly provided, transfers
that serve a “social assistance” function,
reducing the incidence or depth of chronic

6
A similar definition was adopted by the European Report
on Development (EUI, 2010). Most definitions are broad,
but governments, donors and other actors often have
particular viewpoints and objectives: UNICEF, for example,
has a child-focused approach (Gentilini and Omamo, 2009).

15

16

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

poverty. If transfers are guaranteed
and predictable (Devereux, 2002), they
perform a “social insurance” function, by
smoothening consumption and preventing
destitution following a temporary shock
(Devereux, 2001; Lichand, 2010). The most
common programmes are: (1) unconditional
transfers, i.e. programmes that distribute
cash or vouchers, or are in-kind (such as
food), without anything required of the
recipient; (2) conditional transfers, which
may otherwise be identical to unconditional
transfers except in that they require
recipients to meet some specified conditions,
typically to improve the human resources of
their children; (3) public works programmes,
also referred to as cash- or food-for-work, or
guaranteed employment programmes, which
require beneficiaries to work to create or
maintain household or community assets.
Social assistance entitlements are generally
based on citizenship and the socio-economic
status of participating individuals or
households. Programmes may also be designed
to target selected groups within populations
that are considered vulnerable, often children
and older people. Available evidence shows
that social assistance programmes generally
focus on the poor and vulnerable (Fiszbein,
Kanbur and Yemtsov, 2014).
There is a practical distinction between
social assistance and emergency assistance.
Emergency or humanitarian assistance is
provided in the event of natural or humaninduced disasters, and typically involves
short-term assistance, often provided
regardless of the socio-economic status
of beneficiaries. In low-income countries,
emergency and humanitarian assistance
is commonly financed by foreign aid and
implemented by national or international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Emergency assistance and social assistance
have very different rationales, objectives,
target groups and sources of financing. In
this report, we focus only on social assistance.
Social insurance programmes are typically
financed by contributions from employees,
employers and the state, and are based on
the insurance principle, as individuals or
households protect themselves against risk
by pooling resources with a larger number of
similarly exposed individuals or households.
They address life-cycle, employment and

health contingencies. Social insurance
institutions provide cover for designated
contingencies affecting household welfare
or income. Entitlements are mostly based on
workers’ contribution records, and transfers
are normally financed out of social insurance
funds. Innovative approaches to insurance in
rural areas include weather-indexed insurance
schemes, which are being piloted in a number
of countries (Hazell et al., 2010). However,
the availability and uptake of agricultural
insurance in low-income countries are still
modest (Mahul and Stutley, 2010).
Labour market programmes provide
unemployment benefits, build skills
and enhance workers’ productivity and
employability. It has become commonplace
to distinguish “passive” labour market
policies from “active” ones, with passive
interventions aimed at securing basic rights
through, for example, legal frameworks
aimed at ensuring minimum standards
for employment and work, safeguarding
workers’ rights in the workplace and active
interventions enhancing employability.
The available evidence shows that social
insurance and labour market programmes
tend to benefit higher-income groups
(Fiszbein, Kanbur and Yemtsov, 2014).
Social protection is a subset of social
policy, which also includes the provision of
basic services – in the main, education and
health care, but also water and sanitation in
low-income countries. Social protection may
facilitate access to social services by the poor;
for example, school feeding and fee waivers
are social protection measures that facilitate
access to education. Some schemes, such as
pensions, may involve either contributory
(social insurance) or non-contributory (social
assistance) elements (Figure 7).
Over the past few years, the approach to
social protection has evolved by learning
from cross-country experiences, from
stand-alone interventions to building social
protection systems that combine elements of
the different social protection components
(Banerji and Gentilini, 2013). International
and multilateral organizations, such as the
International Labour Organization (ILO),
FAO, the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD), the
World Bank and UNICEF, now emphasize
the need for a systematic approach to social

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

FIGURE 7
The scope of social protection

School feeding, nutrition
programmes, education
stipends, fee waivers

Social protection

Market-based
instruments: public works
programmes, input
subsidies, risk insurance

Cash and in-kind transfers
to enhance welfare, productivity
and economic activity

Social
development

Economic
development

Health, education

Macro-economic policies,
trade, agriculture

Humanitarian
programmes
Food distribution,
cash transfers,
therapeutic feeding

Source: Slater et al., 2010.

protection, aimed at building inclusive and
sustainable social protection systems that
are closely coordinated with other social
and economic policies (ILO, 2014). Notably,
the UN Social Protection Floor, developed
under ILO and World Health Organization
(WHO) leadership, has been described as the
first systematic attempt to operationalize a
rights-based approach to social protection as
a universal policy objective (HLPE, 2012).
The root causes of deprivation and
vulnerability lie in the broader economic,
social, political, cultural, natural and physical
environments. Addressing poverty and
vulnerability therefore requires integrated
and system-wide action in agriculture and
the food system in general, and in public
health and education, as well as in broader
policy domains.

countries were operating conditional cash
transfer programmes; 130 countries were
offering unconditional cash transfers (in 37
countries, these were in the form of noncontributory pensions); and 94 countries
were operating public works programmes.
School feeding was the most popular type of
programme: 131 countries had some form of
school feeding (Box 3) (World Bank, 2015d).
In each country, there may be a different
set of social protection programmes with
different targets at work in different
situations and periods. There is great
diversity in models, even within the same
country. Often, both universal and targeted
programmes can be found in the same
country. A recent trend is to make such
programmes interact as a complementary set
of programmes, in order to achieve better
and long-lasting results using the same vision.

Global and regional trends in social
protection coverage

Beneficiary coverage

Social protection programmes have
expanded rapidly over the past two decades.
In 2014, at least 145 countries provided
one or more forms of social assistance: 63

Throughout the developing world, about
2.1 billion people, or about a third of the
population, receive some form of social
protection (Figure 8). There is wide variation
among regions, with coverage lowest in
regions where poverty incidence is highest.

17

18

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

BOX 3
School-feeding programmes
At least 368 million children receive
food at school each day (WFP, 2013).
Many governments operate publicly
funded school-feeding programmes,
such as Brazil’s national school-feeding
programme, Programa Nacional de
Alimentacão Escolar (PNAE), which
covered 47.2 million children in 2013 (Del
Grossi and Marques, 2015). The World
Food Programme (WFP) itself provides
school meals for more than 20 million
children each year.
The design and implementation models
of school-feeding programmes vary
greatly from country to country. However,
the two main models are: (1) school meals,
where children are fed at school; and (2)
take-home rations, where children receive
food parcels when they attend school. In
the case of school meals, children need
to attend school every day, while takehome rations only require students to
attend school for a specified number of
days. Some school-feeding programmes
combine school meals and take-home
rations to promote food security in the
family and provide stronger incentives
to attend school. In many cases, meals
and snacks are planned by dieticians or
fortified so as to deliver micronutrients
often missing from children’s diets.
Geographical targeting is the most
common criterion in school-feeding
programmes (WFP, 2013). This type of
targeting is the least expensive and
complex as it does not require means
testing or monitoring mechanisms
to ensure that the benefits reach
particular children or to find changes
in circumstances that affect eligibility.
In low-income countries, governments

Only about 22 percent of the population
of South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa are
covered by social protection measures of
any kind; these are the regions with the
highest incidence of extreme poverty. In
regions where poverty incidence is lowest
(see Figure 3, p. 8), social protection coverage
is more extensive, with about 60 percent

usually devise poverty and food security
maps that also integrate educational
needs. In many cases, school-feeding
programmes target take-home rations to
especially vulnerable groups such as girls,
HIV-positive children and specific ethnic
groups.
Targeting the poorest areas of a
country can ensure that most benefits
from school-feeding programmes go
to the poor. However, as programmes
expand, they are likely to include a higher
proportion of non-poor children. This
is especially relevant to upper-middleincome countries, which have more
extensive school-feeding programmes.
In most cases, these countries combine
geographical and individual targeting. In
Chile, for example, schools are selected on
the basis of a school vulnerability index
based on household socio-economic data.
A school committee that includes parents
and teachers is responsible for identifying
vulnerable children in each class. The rest
of the children receive a meal, but at a
cost. With this targeting model, 80 percent
of the expenditure on school feeding
benefited the poorest students (Kain,
Uauy and Taibo, 2002).
Many school-feeding programmes are
combined with programmes to purchase
food from local farmers, with the aim
of promoting rural development as well
as social protection. These combined
programmes are discussed in greater
detail in Chapter 5.

Source: Based in part on Cirillo, Gyori and Soares
(2014).

of the population receiving some form of
social protection.
In South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, social
assistance transfers have the broadest
coverage among the different types of
social protection, reaching, on average,
about 17 and 16 percent of the populations,
respectively. These levels are lower than

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

FIGURE 8
Shares of population covered by different types of social protection programme,
by region

All countries (104)
East Asia and Pacific,
excluding China (12)
Europe and Central Asia (23)
Latin America and
the Caribbean (20)
Middle East and North Africa (8)
South Asia (8)
Sub-Saharan Africa (33)
0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentage

No support

Social assistance only

Labour market programme support only

Social insurance only
Multiple types of support

Note: Number of countries in parentheses.
Source: Authors’ compilation and calculations using World Bank (2015e).

the social assistance coverage levels in most
other regions, for example an average
of 27 percent in Latin America and the
Caribbean and 34 percent in the Middle
East and North Africa. Social assistance
programmes reach more of the extreme poor
than do other types of social protection.
Global estimates indicate that at least
24 percent of the extreme poor were reached
by social assistance programmes in recent
years, while only about 3 percent were
covered by social insurance programmes and
3 percent by labour market programmes
(Figure 9). Such estimates are conservative: in
most middle-income countries, programmes
providing direct transfers in cash and/
or in kind to families in poverty reach a
majority of households in poverty, with a
handful reaching a significant portion of the
population.
A conservative estimate indicates that
over 1.5 billion people in developing
countries are covered by at least one social

assistance programme. While this is close
to the number of people living in extreme
poverty, only one-fourth of the extreme
poor are reached. This lack of coverage of
the extreme poor may be partly explained by
lack of sufficient resources, poor targeting,
or the fact that social assistance programmes
are not targeted at the poor, but may have
other objectives such as improving nutrition
and protecting orphans. Often, the aim is to
build resilience among the vulnerable and to
protect both the poor and non-poor against
shocks.

Does social assistance benefit the rural
poor?
In most regions, rural households are more
likely than urban households to receive social
assistance and, within rural areas, poorer
households are more likely to receive social
assistance than higher-income households
(Figures 10 and 11). Coverage is much lower
in the poorest regions of the world: in the

19

20

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

FIGURE 9
Shares of extreme poor in low- and middle-income countries covered by social
assistance, social insurance and labour market programmes
Social assistance (88)

Social insurance (85)

Labour market programmes (45)

3%

3%

24%

76%

97%

Covered

97%

Not covered

Note: Number of countries in parentheses.
Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank (2015e).

rural areas of South Asia and sub-Saharan
Africa, the share of the poorest quintile
receiving some sort of social assistance is
only about 30 and 20 percent, respectively,
compared with about 70 percent in Latin
America and the Caribbean. The poorest
income quintiles are more likely to receive
social assistance, but significant shares
of other income quintiles, including the
richest, also receive social assistance. Across
all regions, about 15–35 percent of the
richest quintile in rural areas receive social
assistance.
Although poorer and rural households are
more likely to receive social assistance, they
receive slightly smaller amounts of assistance
per capita than their better-off and urban
counterparts (see Annex table A4).

How can social protection and
agriculture help eradicate poverty?
Social protection can alleviate unnecessary
and persistent deprivation suffered by the
poor. Better nutrition also promotes the
economic productivity of the poor and
vulnerable by improving their physical,
cognitive and learning development. For
example, in the United Republic of Tanzania,

children who become maternal orphans
before the age of 15 are disadvantaged
as adults according to several indicators
of well-being; they are more likely to be
shorter, and have less schooling and lower
incomes (Beegle, De Weerdt and Dercon,
2008). The cost of doing nothing to protect
the poor and vulnerable is thus very high:
the global losses in economic productivity
due to undernourishment and micronutrient
deficiencies have been estimated at more
than 10 percent of lifetime earnings for
households and 2–3 percent of global GDP
(World Bank, 2006).
Social protection can therefore help
promote overall social and economic
development, breaking the cycle of poverty
by protecting maternal nutrition and
health, which is fundamental for healthy
children and adults. To do this effectively,
social protection must guarantee incomes
and consumption as well as protect and
build resilience (see Chapter 3 for more on
resilience) against the high degree of risk
and vulnerability prevalent in rural areas,
particularly in agriculture. Social protection
can also protect against risks, such as natural
disasters, livestock diseases, climate change,
financial crises, global food price hikes,
conflict, economic collapse and devastating

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

FIGURE 10
Shares of rural and urban populations covered by social assistance, by region

All countries (92)
East Asia and the Pacific,
excluding China (10)
Europe and Central Asia (18)
Latin America and
the Caribbean (20)
Middle East and North Africa (6)
South Asia (8)
Sub-Saharan Africa (30)
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Percentage

Rural

Urban

Note: Number of countries in parentheses.
Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank (2015e).

FIGURE 11
Shares of rural population covered by social assistance, by income quintile
and region

All countries (92)
East Asia and the Pacific (10)
Europe and Central Asia (18)
Latin America and the Caribbean (20)
Middle East and North Africa (6)
South Asia (8)
Sub-Saharan Africa (30)
0

20

40

60

Percentage

Poorest quintile

2nd quintile

4th quintile

Richest quintile

Note: Number of countries in parentheses.
Source: Authors’ calculations using World Bank (2015e).

3rd quintile

80

21

epidemics such as HIV/AIDS, which are major
threats to the welfare of rural households
(Dorward et al., 2006; Dercon, 2005).
Given this complexity, social protection
programmes need to be effectively designed
for different contexts. Figure 12 provides
a stylized view of welfare in four different
types of households. The solid line traces
welfare over time, while the broken line
denotes a poverty threshold. Household
A has an upward trajectory in welfare,
but one punctuated by shocks that lower
welfare. Smoothening these shocks for
household A would strengthen the welfare
trend and lead to a permanent escape from
poverty. Household B’s welfare, on the other
hand, moves above and below the poverty
threshold alternating spells of poverty with
spells of non-poverty. Smoothening the
shocks for household B would lead to a
constant welfare level at or just above the
poverty threshold. Household C’s welfare is
not affected by shocks and, instead, shows a
constant level of welfare below the poverty
line. In this case, no smoothening of welfare
would, by itself, lift this household above
the poverty line. Household D’s welfare
is affected by shocks, in a downward
spiral of worsening welfare. In this case,
smoothening welfare, protecting the
household from shocks, is unlikely to be
sufficient to enable it to escape poverty
permanently.
An approach that would smoothen out
the variation in welfare over time caused
by shocks could help households A and B
escape from poverty, but is unlikely to be

effective for households C and D. Without
a sustained transfer of assets and resources
for consumption, households C and D are
unlikely to exit poverty.
Rural areas and agricultural households’
livelihoods are especially exposed to certain
risks (Barrett, 2010). In an uninsured rural
population, exposure to idiosyncratic shocks
– such as illness, job loss, family deaths,
births, migration, marriages and accidents
– can cause or deepen poverty. The most
serious risks borne by the rural poor vary
markedly across space and time, even among
seemingly homogeneous populations (Doss,
McPeak and Barrett, 2008).
There is substantial evidence (reviewed
in subsequent chapters) showing that
social protection programmes, when
appropriately designed, do help alleviate
poverty by increasing the food consumption
of the rural poor and vulnerable. Often,
these programmes also allow households
to diversify their food consumption and
– when designed in a gender-sensitive
manner and accompanied by complementary
interventions in health, sanitation, home
gardens and nutrition education – improve
nutrition, health and education outcomes in
the longer term.
Moreover, within rural/agricultural settings,
social protection may also be particularly
well suited to promoting economic activity
and helping households out of poverty.
That is because most rural social protection
beneficiaries live where markets for financial
services (such as credit and insurance),
labour, goods and inputs are poor, difficult

FIGURE 12
Hypothetical welfare trajectories for different types of households in poverty

Time
Source: Barrientos, 2014.

D

Time

Welfare

C

Welfare

B

Welfare

A

Welfare

22

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Time

Time

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

to access or do not function well. Social
protection reduces important constraints to
economic activity, such as credit and liquidity
constraints, and, if transfers are regular
and reliable, provides certainty in the face
of risk. As a consequence, poor households
invest in productive assets, often reflected
in increased own-farm production. They
are also often able to engage in activities
characterized by higher risk and higher
returns. Because poor households typically
face a range of constraints, programmes that
are multifaceted and include cash and/or
assets as well as support to address specific
constraints – for example, financial services,
nutrition knowledge and business skills
training – are more effective in transforming
livelihoods.
Greater beneficiary household incomes
increase demand for local goods and services.
However, local supply constraints may lead
to inflationary pressures, which can be
relaxed by agricultural and infrastructural
interventions. In this sense, social protection
programmes and agricultural interventions
are complementary and can generate
a positive cycle of human well-being,
agricultural growth and economic security.
Within the longer-term context of the
structural transformation of agriculture,
social protection can play a key role by
making the process more inclusive and less
painful by mitigating the costs farmers face
in adjusting to changes. Social protection
can also help avoid migration born out of
desperation and that simply replaces rural
poverty with urban poverty. It can provide
greater choice and allow migration in
response to economic opportunities, thus
facilitating the transformation.
This report reviews the role of social
protection, particularly social assistance, in
alleviating deprivation, enhancing human
resources and productivity, and encouraging
investment and diversification for poor
households in rural areas. It discusses how
social protection affects individual and
household behaviour; whether or not it can
sustainably lift households out of poverty
by itself; and how it can be linked with
agricultural policies and programmes, and
vice versa, thus making social protection part
of a more comprehensive rural development
strategy. The well-documented role of

agriculture in development and poverty
reduction makes it a natural ally of, and
complement to, social protection. When
combined, the two approaches can serve
both immediate and long-term livelihood
needs.

Is social protection affordable?
Social protection is affordable; moreover,
given the evidence provided in this report, it
should be seen as an investment, not just a
cost (see also Box 4). Overall, US$329 billion
was spent globally on social protection
between 2010 and 2014, twice the amount
needed to close the poverty gap for those
living on less than $1.25 a day (World Bank,
2015d). On average, spending on social
assistance – including cash and in-kind,
conditional and unconditional programmes,
as well as public works (but excluding
subsidies) – constitutes 1.6 percent of GDP for
middle-income countries and 1.5 percent for
low-income countries (World Bank, 2015d).
However, spending varies among countries;
some of the countries with the highest
poverty rates spend the least. Moreover, not
all programmes are well targeted, leaving
many of the poor not covered.
Can social assistance programmes be
scaled-up in poor countries? While the
cost of eliminating the poverty gap over
the period 2016–30 is, on average, less
than 0.1 percent of GDP each year in East
Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean,
and the Middle East and North Africa, and
1.6 percent in South Asia, it would reach
approximately 5.3 percent of GDP in subSaharan Africa, and in 14 countries of the
region would exceed 10 percent of GDP
(FAO, IFAD and WFP, 2015b).
Such relative spending levels could be
reached progressively over time. In lowerincome countries, social assistance may,
initially, be targeted more narrowly at the
poorest of the poor. Bringing the poorest
20 percent of the population to a daily
consumption level of $1.00 would cost less,
between 0.1 and 2 percent of GDP for most
countries in sub-Saharan Africa. For five
countries the cost would be higher, ranging
from 2.3 to 4.5 percent of GDP (Plavgo, de
Milliano and Handa, 2013).

23

24

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

BOX 4
Achieving Zero Hunger
In a number of regional and international
fora, the international community has
pledged to eliminate poverty and hunger
by 2030, if not earlier. The Post-2015
Sustainable Development Agenda and the
Financing for Development Addis Ababa
Action Accord are prominent examples.
This global commitment is reflected in the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
namely SDG 1 to eliminate poverty by
2030 and the proposed SDG 2 to eliminate
hunger and malnutrition by the same year.
Despite substantial progress in reducing
hunger and near achievement of the
Millennium Development Goal target
of halving the proportion of hungry
people by 2015, the latest estimates
suggest that, globally, about 795 million
people still suffer from chronic (dietary
energy) undernourishment (FAO, IFAD
and WFP, 2015a). FAO’s business-as-usual
scenario forecast suggests that, in 2030,
more than 650 million people will still be
undernourished. This suggests that relying
on anticipated economic growth alone
will not be sufficient to eliminate hunger

In many countries, financing such
programmes will require difficult expenditure
choices. Donor support will be essential in
the short-to-medium term for maintaining
programmes in some countries. Yet,
mobilizing domestic fiscal resources will
be important for establishing a politically
and financially sustainable basis for social
assistance programmes. This progression
from donor-funded pilots to domestically
financed and managed social protection
systems is already taking place in Kenya,
Lesotho and Zambia, among other countries.
Pilot programmes and careful monitoring and
evaluation can help start the policy dialogue
needed to build a national consensus on
the nature, scale and financing of social
assistance within a country (Davis et al.,
forthcoming).

and improve nutrition. Purposeful action is
needed if the pledge to eradicate hunger
is to become reality.
A recent FAO study estimates that over
the next 15 years an additional gross
annual investment of US$267 billion –
0.3 percent of gross world product – is
required to immediately overcome
poverty, hunger and undernutrition
(FAO, IFAD and WFP, 2015b). A key
component of this amount is social
protection: up to US$116 billion. Welldesigned social protection not only
meets consumption needs but, when
combined with appropriate public
investments and enabling environments,
can break the cycle of poverty, hunger
and low productivity. In rural areas, such
investments will raise opportunities for
the poor to earn incomes from productive
activities. Gradually, earned incomes
can be expected to replace income
supplements provided by social protection.
The additional investment is estimated at
US$105 billion in rural areas and US$46
billion in urban areas.

Structure of the report
Chapter 2 reviews the effectiveness of
social protection interventions in reducing
poverty, raising food consumption, relieving
household food insecurity and hunger,
and promoting longer-term improvements
in nutrition. Chapter 3 reviews evidence
of the effectiveness of social protection
in promoting long-term improvements in
nutrition and in stimulating investment and
promoting local development. Chapter 4
examines factors driving different impacts
of programmes and draws lessons for
programme design. Chapter 5 discusses how
social protection and agricultural policies
can be interwoven to maximize programme
and developmental impacts. Chapter 6
summarizes the report’s main conclusions.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

2. Social protection for rural
poverty reduction and
increased food security
Eradicating poverty and food insecurity are
key targets of the post-2015 development
agenda. Raising incomes and employment is
essential for achieving these goals, and there
are many ways this can be accomplished, such
as by raising small family farm productivity,
increasing education levels and assisting
households to enter new and higher-return
activities. These are longer-term aspirations
for the poor, while poverty and hunger are
daily realities with lasting consequences. The
poor and hungry need more immediate help.
In this chapter, we review the effectiveness
of social protection interventions in reducing
poverty, raising food consumption and
diversifying diets. We review a broad range
of social protection measures, with the
main focus on social assistance interventions
targeted at poor households, rather than
other social protection measures.

Social protection can help reduce
poverty
A broad range of social protection measures
(including social assistance, social insurance
and labour market programmes) currently
prevent about 150 million people worldwide
from falling into extreme poverty (Fiszbein,
Kanbur and Yemtsov, 2014). The majority
of these people are in Eastern Europe
and Central Asia, where social protection
coverage is widespread. Far fewer people
are protected in sub-Saharan Africa, where
coverage is lower and less than 1 percent of
the population moves out of poverty each
year as a result of social protection transfers.
Social protection comes in many forms,
some of which have had more success in
reducing poverty than others. Here, we
review several social assistance programmes
for which evaluations have been undertaken
with a view to assessing their impact

and identifying which features ensure
successful outcomes. Fiszbein et al. (2009)
reviewed a number of conditional cash
transfer programmes and concluded that
many such programmes reduce poverty, at
least in the short run (Box 5). For example,
Mexico’s Programa de Educación, Salud
y Alimentación (PROGRESA), introduced
in 1997, renamed (and slightly modified)
Oportunidades in 2003 and Prospera in
2014, reached 21 percent of the population
in 2013 (see also Box 5) (World Bank,
2015d).7 Skoufias (2005) calculates that this
programme reduced the poverty headcount
among beneficiaries by about 10 percent
and the poverty gap8 by about 30 percent
over two years. The programme’s success
was, in part, due to the fact that it replaced
other poorly targeted subsidies, suggesting
that good targeting is important for
reducing poverty. Furthermore, the Mexican
experience highlights the importance of
rigorous independent monitoring and impact
evaluation, which gave the programme
legitimacy and enabled it to be scaled up
and improved on the basis of lessons learned
regarding design and implementation.
Brazil’s Bolsa Família reached just over
14 million families in 2015 (World Bank,
2015d) corresponding to about 24.5 percent
of the country’s population (see also Box 5).
The programme has been credited with a
reduction in poverty and extreme poverty by
1.9 and 1.6 percentage points, respectively,
between 2003 and 2009. That corresponds
to 13 percent of poverty and 32 percent
of extreme poverty. The programme had a

7
Prospera continues Oportunidades but seeks to enhance
linkages from conditional cash transfers to productive and
financial inclusion through beneficiaries’ increased access to
savings, microcredit and insurance.
8
The term “poverty gap” refers to the average shortfall
from the poverty line times the poverty incidence.

25

26

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

BOX 5
Conditional cash transfer programmes and conditional in-kind transfer programmes
Conditional cash transfer programmes
(CCTs) are programmes that transfer cash
in return for beneficiaries meeting some
obligation. Typical conditions relate to
children’s school attendance, visits to
health facilities, or attendance at skills,
nutrition or other training (school stipend
programmes are considered as CCTs). The
number of countries with CCTs rose from
27 in 2008 to 63 in 2014. The programmes
are most widespread in Latin America
and the Caribbean (22 countries with
CCT programmes) and sub-Saharan Africa
(18 countries). The largest CCTs in terms
of individuals covered are India’s Janani
Suraksha Yojana (78 million), Bolsa Família
in Brazil (49 million) and Prospera in
Mexico (26 million).

stronger impact on the poverty gap, which
fell by 18 percent during the same time
period (Soares, 2012).
Bolsa Família is also a good example of
the value of a comprehensive network
of complementary policies. For example,
following the 2008 global financial crisis,
the Government of Brazil was able to
react quickly at low cost by scaling up
programmes. This had a significant impact,
reaching over 1.6 million of the most
vulnerable people and, in turn, contributed
to domestic demand growth: despite a
decrease in GDP in 2009 of 0.6 percent,
private consumption remained stable and
resumed growing in the second half of 2009
(Berg and Tobin, 2011).
Unconditional cash transfer programmes,
often targeted at specific categories of
vulnerable demographic groups, such as
orphans or the elderly, have also reduced
poverty (see also Box 6). For example, Kenya’s
Cash Transfer Programme for Orphans and
Vulnerable Children (CT-OVC) 9 covered more
than 245 000 children, about 40 percent of the
total number of the orphans and vulnerable

9
The CT-OVC targets ultra-poor households with an OVC,
defined as household residents up to 17 years old with at
least one deceased parent, or a parent who is chronically ill,
or whose main caregiver is chronically ill.

Conditional in-kind transfers (CITs)
are similar to CCTs in that they impose
conditions aimed at changing beneficiary
behaviour, but the transfers provided are
in kind. School-feeding programmes are
examples of CITs. School feeding is most
common in Africa (45 countries), Latin
America and the Caribbean (28 countries),
Eastern Europe and Central Asia (23
countries). The largest programmes are
India’s school-feeding programme and the
Programa Nacional de Alimentação Escolar
in Brazil, which cover 105 and 47 million
children, respectively.

Source: World Bank, 2015d.

children living in extreme poverty in 2011. The
programme resulted in a 13 percentage point
reduction in poverty levels (living on less than
$1 a day) in beneficiary households between
2007 and 2009 (Ward et al., 2010).
The Child Support Grant (CSG) in South
Africa is the largest social protection
programme in sub-Saharan Africa. It entails
a cash transfer to the primary caregiver of a
child who is under the age of 18 and living in
a household earning below a defined income
threshold. In 2014, the programme reached
over 11 million poor children between the
ages of 0 and 18 (SASSA, 2015) and led to a
9 percent drop in child poverty in 2007 (SASSA,
2011, cited in Tiberti et al., 2013). In addition,
the South African social (non-contributory)
pension scheme was estimated to have
reduced the poverty headcount by about
2.8 percentage points in 2002 in Cape Town
and Eastern Cape (Barrientos, 2003). Moreover,
it reduced the country’s overall poverty gap by
21 percent and by 54 percent for households
with older people (Omilola and Kaniki, 2014).
The analysis by Barrientos (2003) also indicates
that the social pension reduces the likelihood
of falling into poverty by 12.5 percent.
Leibbrandt et al. (2010) estimate that, overall,
the key South African government grants
– i.e. State Old-Age Pension, the Disability
Grant, the Child Support Grant and the

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

BOX 6
Unconditional cash transfer programmes and unconditional in-kind transfer programmes
Unconditional cash (UCT) or in-kind (UIT)
transfer programmes foresee transfers
without any particular obligations on
the part of beneficiaries. In place of
conditions, some programmes include
specific messaging recommending how
transfers should be spent. For example,
the Lesotho Child Grant Programme
(CGP) had especially strong messaging
on expenditures on children’s clothes,
shoes and related expenses, which is
claimed to have resulted in particularly
large impacts on these expenditures
(Pellerano et al., 2014). Often, these types
of transfer are targeted at vulnerable
demographic groups, such as the elderly
(social pensions), orphaned children or
schoolchildren.

Foster Care Grant – lowered poverty by six
percentage points in 2008.
Targeted or untargeted food price
subsidies are also a form of unconditional
transfers. India’s Targeted Public Distribution
System (TPDS) is an example of a food price
subsidy that reached about 45 percent of
the population in 2010–11 (Himanshu and
Sen, 2013) and was expected to reach about
two-thirds of the population (75 percent
of the rural and half the urban population)
from 2013.10 The TPDS provides grain to
state governments according to a targeted
system that has three retail price tiers: the
Antyodaya price (the largest subsidy) for
extremely poor households; the BPL (Below
Poverty Line) price for households designated
as poor; and the APL (Above Poverty Line)
price for all remaining households with
ration cards. The third entails a much lower
level of subsidy. The TPDS has had a strong
poverty-reducing impact: the poverty
headcount rate in 2009–10 would have been
4.6 percentage points higher in the absence
of the TPDS and the mid-day school meal
(Himanshu and Sen, 2013).11 Similar results

10
The TPDS replaced the untargeted Public Distribution
System (PDS) in 1997.
11
Most of the impact is due to the TPDS. The Mid-Day Meal
is the universal school-feeding programme (see also Box 5).

There are about 130 UCTs, 37 of which
are social pension programmes. These
programmes are most common in Africa
(41 countries), Eastern Europe and Central
Asia (29 countries), and Latin America and
the Caribbean (28 countries). There are
92 countries with UITs, most of which are
in Africa (42) and Latin America and the
Caribbean (24). The largest UCT is China’s
Di-Bao (75 million beneficiaries), followed
by India’s Indira Gandhi National Old-Age
Pension Scheme (21 million). The largest
UITs are Turkey’s Gida Yardimi (9 million)
and Mexico’s milk grant benefit (6 million).

Source: World Bank, 2015d.

were found by Drèze and Khera (2013),
who reported that, in 2009–10, the TPDS
reduced rural poverty at the national level
by about 11 percent and the poverty gap by
18 percent. The impact has been particularly
large in states with a well-functioning TPDS,
while it has had little impact in a number of
states with a poorly functioning TPDS.
Similarly, some public works programmes
have effectively reduced poverty in
certain settings. In Liberia, the Cash for
Work Temporary Employment Project was
implemented as a response to the 2007–08
food price crises. By 2010, the project
created temporary employment for 17 000
vulnerable households and provided public
services to Liberian communities, including
rehabilitating public agricultural land in rural
areas and other work in urban and rural
areas. Andrews et al. (2011) showed that the
project reduced the number of participants
living in poverty by 5 percent and reduced
the poverty gap among programme
participants by 21 percent.
India is home to the Mahatma Ghandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(MGNREGA), the world’s largest anti-poverty
public employment programme (see also
Box 7). The positive experience with the
Maharashtra Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MEGS) in the 1970s provided support for the

27

28

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

introduction of MGNREGA. Introduced after
a severe drought, the MEGS had a strong
poverty-alleviating impact while at the
same time improving the state’s irrigation
infrastructure and rural roads network
(Subbarao et al., 2013). Independent
studies show that, despite shortcomings,
the MGNREGA programme contributes
to reducing poverty and increasing social
inclusion, but the available evidence also
indicates that MGNREGA’s performance
varies significantly across states (UNDP, 2013).
For example, Dutta et al. (2014) found that
the MGNREGA programme in Bihar could
potentially reduce poverty in the state by 14
percentage points but that its actual impact
was closer to one percentage point. They
concluded that most of this shortfall was

due to the scheme failing to provide the
promised “guaranteed” employment.
The Ethiopian Productive Safety Net
Programme (PSNP), for example, is a public
works programme that also includes cash
transfers to poor, labour-constrained
households. The PSNP, which covers about
7.5 million individuals and is the largest
safety-net programme in sub-Saharan Africa
outside of South Africa, is credited with
having reduced the national poverty rate by
two percentage points. The programme’s
design and implementation also helps
households cope better with seasonal hunger,
a perennial issue in many countries (see
Box 8). Berhane et al. (2014) calculate that
the programme has helped reduce seasonal
hunger among beneficiaries by a third.

BOX 7
India’s Mahatma Ghandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
The MGNREGA is a historic piece of
legislation aiming at two interlinked
goals. Its rights-based approach views
employment as a right of the citizen to be
delivered by the state. The first goal is to
ensure livelihood security to rural residents
by providing at least a hundred days of
guaranteed wage employment in a fiscal
year to every household with an adult
member willing to do unskilled manual
work for a minimum wage. The second
goal is to mobilize existing surplus labour
in the countryside, unleash productive
forces and generate more economic
growth in rural areas.
The Act came into force on 2 February
2006 and was implemented in phases to
cover all rural districts within three years.
At its peak in 2010/11, it covered more
than 55 million rural households, about a
third of all rural households, generating
2.6 billion days of employment in that year.
It is a relatively inexpensive programme:
even at its peak, total spending came
to less than 1.0 percent of GDP, and it
currently accounts for less than 0.5 percent
of GDP. The programme is large, but has
been unevenly implemented across states.
The peak years of MGNREGA performance,
in terms of both financial and employment
indicators, were 2009/10 and 2010/11;

there has been a general decline in most
states since then (Ghosh, 2014).
The programme is designed to work as
follows (MORD, 2013). Adult members of
all rural households willing to do unskilled
manual work register with the local Gram
Panchayat (the lowest-level elected body).
Each household is entitled to 100 days
of employment per year, although the
programme has only provided 40–50 days
of employment per household each year
so far. The registered household is issued
a job card. A written application for work
is the basis for a guarantee of providing
employment within 15 days. If this is not
provided, the state is supposed to pay
an unemployment allowance (of half the
wage rate) to the beneficiary. At least a
third of the beneficiaries of the scheme
must be women. In practice, women
have accounted for around half of total
beneficiaries. Facilities – such as crèches for
children, drinking water and shade for rest
– are supposed to be provided. The cost of
projects, excluding wages for beneficiaries,
cannot be more than 40 percent of total
costs. Contractors and use of labourdisplacing machinery are prohibited.

Source: Ghosh, 2014.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

BOX 8
Social protection and seasonality
Seasonality is a major contributor to
hunger and undernutrition (Vaitla,
Devereux and Swan, 2009). This is
particularly true in areas dependent
on rain-fed cultivation, especially in
sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Asia.
In Madagascar, for example, Dostie,
Haggblade and Randriamamonjy (2002)
report that a million more people fell into
poverty during the lean season.
In Ethiopia, Dercon and Krishnan (2000)
found that poverty and consumption
fluctuated substantially between preand post-harvest periods, resulting in
significant fluctuations in nutritional
status. In Malawi and the Niger, Cornia,
Deotti and Sassi (2012) found that strong
seasonal food-price variations were a
major determinant of child malnutrition,

However, public works programmes can
also impose high burdens on participants
in terms of direct and opportunity costs.
For example, employment in public works
can replace other employment activities,
reducing the net impact on earnings from
the returns to the activities individuals
would otherwise have been engaged in.
When wage employment opportunities are
minimal and agricultural activities are highly
seasonal, this type of substitution is likely
to be relatively small. The low wage offered
is expected to induce self-targeting by the
most food-insecure households, but this may
not always be the case. For example, in rural
Ethiopia, higher-income households were
more likely to participate in food-for-work
schemes because they had surplus labour,
whereas poorer households were labourconstrained, and so could not afford to
participate (Barrett and Clay, 2003).
In conclusion, there is substantial evidence
that many social assistance programmes
reduce poverty, at least in the short term.
Monitoring and impact evaluation can
help build a strong base for scaling-up and
allow improvements to programmes. The
experience of Brazil shows the value of being
able to scale up programmes in response
to negative shocks. Programme design is

and these fluctuations occurred even
with relatively abundant harvests because
of limited investment in storage at the
community and household levels, limited
credit availability and inadequate strategic
food reserves.
Social protection programmes, if
sensitively designed and timed to take
account of location-specific price variations
and labour demands, can help mitigate
the adverse impacts of seasonality. For
example, the Bangladesh Employment
Generation Programme for the Poorest
(Food for Work) programme creates
wage employment in exchange for food
during the slack season and is cited as a
good example of a seasonal programme
(Subbarao et al., 2013).

also important. In designing public works
programmes, care should be taken not to
replace other economic opportunities, and
household opportunity costs must also be
considered. The experience with India’s TPDS
shows that programme implementation is
of central importance. In programmes in
sub-Saharan Africa, local committees have
played a significant role in programme
implementation; hence, building capacity at
this level will enhance programme outcomes
(Barca et al., 2015).
Finally, while not all programmes may
actually reduce poverty, they may be
important in preventing people from falling
into poverty. Indeed, as noted by Fiszbein,
Kanbur and Yemtsov (2014), social protection
programmes are often designed not to
target the actual poor, but rather to protect
the non-poor from becoming poor or to help
the vulnerable improve their resilience.

Social protection and food security
Food insecurity is closely related to poverty.
It is therefore not surprising that many social
assistance programmes have had a positive
impact on food security by increasing access
to more diverse and higher-quality food.

29

30

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Some programmes have also improved food
security via increases in home production.
Hidrobo, Hoddinott, Kumar and Olivier
(2014a) present the most recent and
comprehensive review of studies that assess
the impact of social assistance on household
food security.12 Their meta-analysis,
covering 48 studies of 39 social protection
programmes, found average programme
impacts (relative to the baseline) of
13 percent for caloric intake and 17 percent
for food consumption/expenditure. They
also found evidence that some programmes
improved dietary diversity, especially with
regard to consumption of animal products.
The following presents more details of
selected programmes.
Between November 1997 and November
1999, PROGRESA (now Prospera), a
conditional cash transfer programme in
Mexico, raised median food expenditures
of beneficiary households by 13 percent.
This increase was largely driven by higher
expenditures on fruit, vegetables, meats and
animal products. By November 1999, median
caloric intake had risen by nearly 11 percent
(Hoddinott, Skoufias and Washburn, 2000).
For the same programme, Angelucci and
Attanasio (2009) found that consumption
(per adult equivalent) in rural areas had
increased by 8, 14, and 17 percent about
6, 12, and 18 months, respectively, after
the beginning of the programme. Also for
the same programme, Angelucci and De
Giorgi (2009) found that transfers to eligible
households indirectly increased consumption
of ineligible households living in the same
villages by about 20 percent.
In Paraguay, beneficiary households of
the Tekoporã conditional cash transfer
programme reached per capita consumption
levels 9 to 15 percent above those of the
control group (Soares, Ribas and Hirata,
2008). For a programme in Ecuador,
Hidrobo, Hoddinott, Peterman et al. (2014)

12
Study selection criteria were the following: (1) evaluations
should be based on samples of 300 households or more,
given that impact evaluations based on very small samples
are not very informative and may not detect impacts
because of the sample size; and (2) studies should include
a rigorous impact evaluation based on a randomized
control trial, quasi-experimental techniques, difference-indifference, or instrumental variables. For a more detailed
discussion of the methodology, see Hidrobo, Hoddinott,
Kumar and Olivier (2014a).

reported that the value of per capita food
consumption, per capita caloric intake and
dietary diversity all increased, regardless
of whether the programme transferred
cash, vouchers or food. They did not find
differences in the shares of the transfers
used on food and non-food consumption,
but found that food transfers had a greater
impact on caloric intake while vouchers
had a greater impact on improving dietary
diversity. In the case of food transfers, the
increased food consumption largely came
from the food items making up the food
transfer – which, if sufficiently diverse,
could increase dietary diversity – while, for
vouchers, the increased food consumption
was derived from a greater variety of food
items, including vegetables, eggs, and milk
and dairy products.
Unconditional programmes have also had
positive impacts on food consumption. For
Bangladesh, Ahmed, Quisumbing et al. (2009)
compared three different unconditional
transfer programmes targeting the ultrapoor (their comparison also included a public
works programme, the Rural Maintenance
Programme, discussed below). Two are
components of the Vulnerable Group
Development (VGD) programme: the
Income Generating VGD (IGVGD) and the
Food Security VGD (FSVGD). Both target
poor women, the former with a food ration
over 24 months and the latter with food
and cash; the Food for Asset Creation (FFA)
component of the Integrated Food Security
programme distributed a combination of
food and cash as wage payments to workers
(at least 70 percent of whom must be
women) in labour-intensive public works
programmes. They found that participation in
all three programmes significantly increased
expenditures on food consumption,
translating into statistically significant
increases in caloric intake of 164, 247 and
194 kilocalories per person per day for
participants in the IGVGD, FSVGD and FFA
programmes, respectively.
Unconditional programmes from subSaharan Africa have also shown positive
results. The Child Grant model of the Zambia
Social Cash Transfer (SCT) programme and the
Malawi SCT programme significantly raised
the average consumption level of beneficiary
households and improved dietary diversity
(American Institutes for Research, 2013; Boone

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

et al., 2013). For Kenya, Asfaw et al. (2014)
found that the impact, after two years, of
the CT-OVC programme, which transferred a
fixed amount, varied by household size. While
the programme had no effect on spending
for most food consumption categories for
larger households, the programme had large,
positive and significant effects for dairy, eggs,
meat, fish and fruit for households with fewer
members and for female-headed households,
in part from higher own production. Romeo
et al. (2015) found that after four years,
and the erosion of the value of the transfer
due to inflation, the CT-OVC no longer had
a significant impact on food consumption.
However, the behavioural change associated
with the consumption of more diverse and
better-quality food persisted.
Pension programmes can also contribute
to food security. In the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, for example, Martínez (2004) found
that the social (non-contributory) pension
provided by the BONOSOL (Bono Solidario)
programme was spent almost entirely on
raising food consumption, which rose by
6.3 percent. Most of the increase, which was
achieved in part by greater home production,
was for meat, animal products, vegetables
and fruit.
Public works programmes have also been
found to be effective in reducing hunger.
Gilligan and Hoddinott (2007) studied the
Employment Generation scheme and the
“Gratuitous Food“ (Free Food Distribution)
scheme in Ethiopia, and found that
beneficiaries were able to increase their food
consumption in the 18 months following
the 2002 drought. In India, Deininger and
Liu (2013) found that participants in the
National Rural Employment Scheme in
Andhra Pradesh significantly increased intake
of protein and energy in the short run, while
Ahmed, Quisumbing et al. (2009) found that
the Rural Maintenance Programme (RMP)
in Bangladesh, which targeted women with
cash wages for maintaining rural roads, led
to significantly higher expenditures on food
and a statistically significant increase in
average caloric intake of 271 kilocalories per
person per day.
The most widespread form of social
protection is school feeding (see also
Chapter 1, Box 3). There is evidence that
many school-feeding programmes increase
the food consumption of schoolchildren.

A school snack programme in the Philippines
increased the calorie consumption of
primary-school-age children by about 300
kilocalories per child per day (Jacoby, 2002),
while parents did not reduce the amount
of food served to children at home. This
finding is also echoed in evidence from other
countries, such as Bangladesh (Ahmed, 2004)
and Burkina Faso (Kazianga, de Walque and
Alderman, 2014).
Many social assistance programmes,
regardless of type, have sizeable impacts
on food security and dietary diversity,
particularly the consumption of animal
products.13 However, some programmes
seem not to have such impacts. The lack of
impact of the Lesotho CGP, which provided
a cash transfer every three months, was
attributed to the long gap between
payments, exacerbated by difficulties in
making regular payments. This hampered
the ability of households to smoothen
consumption over the whole period between
payments. Qualitative field work found that
improvements in food consumption and
dietary diversity were mainly concentrated
around payment dates, thus making it
difficult for the randomized control trial
to capture increases in consumption
(Pellerano et al., 2014). Nevertheless, the
impact evaluation did detect a significant
improvement in reported food security
indicators (Pellerano et al., 2014). Similarly
in Ghana, the irregular payments of the
Livelihood Empowerment against Poverty
(LEAP) programme, which reached over
71 000 poor households, made consumption
smoothening difficult (Handa et al., 2013).

Gender-sensitive social protection
is critical for food security
The impact of social protection on food
security and poverty reduction can be
enhanced by focusing on the role of women

13
Policy-makers may be concerned that poor households
use some of the cash transfers to buy alcohol, tobacco
or other “temptation goods“. In this regard, a review by
Evans and Popova (2014) of the impact of cash transfers on
‘temptation goods‘ across 44 estimates from 19 studies (for
both unconditional and conditional cash transfers) finds,
almost without exception, no significant impact, and, in
some cases, even a significant negative impact, of transfers
on expenditures on alcohol and tobacco.

31

32

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

in targeting and programme design.
Gender inequalities in decision-making and
control over household income is persistent
across many countries, yet evidence from
Africa, Asia and Latin America consistently
shows that families benefit when women
have greater status and power within the
household. For example, some studies found
that when women have more influence over
economic decisions, families allocate more
income to food, health, education, children’s
clothing and children’s nutrition (van den
Bold, Quisumbing and Gillespie, 2013;
Holmes and Jones, 2013).
In many countries, the majority of cash
transfer programme beneficiaries are poor
and vulnerable women. Many programmes
disproportionately serve female-headed
households because they are overrepresented
among populations of extremely poor,
labour-constrained households. Also, the
vast majority of programmes target women
in male-headed households as direct
beneficiaries.14 As a result, it is often claimed
that such programmes have an empowering
effect on women based on the assumption
that, as the main recipients of the transfers,
women gain greater control over financial
resources. Nevertheless, available evidence
on empowerment outcomes is far from
conclusive (de la O Campos, 2015). This is,
in part, because outcomes are shaped not
only by women’s roles within the household
and society, but also by existing gender
inequalities in knowledge, skills, influence
and ownership and control of resources.
In Kenya, for example, women who
received cash transfers spent first on
children’s nutrition and education, and only
then on investments in productive activities
(FAO, 2013b). Similar results were seen in
Ethiopia, where female- and male-headed
households who were beneficiaries of the
PSNP had markedly different spending
patterns following the transfers. Femaleheaded households prioritized education,
paying school registration fees and keeping
their children in school as long as possible,
14
For example, in sub-Saharan Africa, in Ghana’s LEAP,
Zambia’s Child Grant, Zimbabwe’s HSCT and Lesotho’s CGP,
81, 98, 64 and 67 percent of recipients, respectively, were
women. In Ethiopia’s PSNP, Kenya’s CT-OVC and Malawi’s
SCT, 73, 65 and 83 percent of recipients were femaleheaded households. Information based on PtoP data (see
also Tirivayi, Knowles and Davis (2013).

while male-headed households tended to
invest in extending agricultural activities
and accumulating physical assets (Slater et
al., 2006). Men tend to have more access
to productive assets than women, which
probably explains why they invest more in
them.
While targeting women can increase
expenditures in areas that they control, it
does not, for the most part, change general
household-spending patterns, which tend
to remain highly gendered and dependent
on custom and on cultural and historical
circumstances. While this may, in part,
be due to individual preferences – with
women preferring to spend on short-term
consumption for their children, and men
preferring to make longer-term investments
– expenditure patterns not only reflect the
dominant social norms, but also the property
rights situation and access to resources,
which often disadvantage women (Doss,
2011). Where women have limited legal
rights to land and other assets, prioritizing
consumption over investment may be the best
option open to them (Holmes et al., 2014).
The evidence suggests that prevailing
patriarchal gender norms continue to limit
women’s financial decision-making, even
when programmes have attempted to factor
this into their design. In India, for example,
the MGNREGA programme includes a
provision to avoid paying the earnings of
female family members to male heads of
household. Despite this, Reddy et al. (2011)
found that women were often unable to
control how the money was spent, even
when they had collected their own wages.
In Bihar, for example, 50 percent of husbands
controlled their wife’s MGNREGA income.
However, the impacts vary with context.
In Brazil, female recipients are, by law,
designated to control the transferred cash
and this has had significant positive effects
on women’s bargaining power (de Brauw
et al., 2014).
Kenya’s Hunger Safety Net Programme
(HSNP) and CT-OVC, Zimbabwe’s Harmonized
Social Cash Transfer (HSCT) and Ghana’s
LEAP programme have experienced
similar problems, possibly because they do
not designate women as “official” cash
recipients, or have not introduced other
measures, such as individual bank accounts or
gender sensitization, to help women control

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

the cash. Nor do these programmes aim to
alter gender relations (OPM, 2013b; Jennings
et al., 2013).
Empowerment outcomes from social
protection measures are influenced by
programme objectives (e.g. to empower
women) and programme design (e.g. when
females are transfer recipients, or where the
programme includes spouse sensitization
on gender issues) as well as the extent of
women’s decision-making power before
the programme begins. Educational level is
critical, as is the degree to which a woman’s
educational level matches or exceeds that
of her spouse (de Brauw et al., 2014).
Developing women’s skills and enabling
their access to resources and employment
need greater attention. In addition,
social protection programmes need to be
continued over sufficient time to ensure
sustainable economic empowerment impacts
(de la O Campos, 2015).
The design of social protection
programmes also needs to take into account
women’s special role in household food
security in much of the world. Traditionally,
women bear responsibility for preparing
meals and caring for children and other
family members. They are also typically
responsible for collecting firewood, fuel and
water. At the same time, they are farmers
and/or contribute labour to the household
farm or participate in the labour market.
These different responsibilities typically
impose heavy burdens on women’s time,
and often imply trade-offs in how time is
allocated, inter alia, for child care. Early
public works programmes were heavily
criticized for adding to women’s burdens,
but more recent programmes have been
designed to foster women’s inclusion.
The Indian MGNREGA programme, for
example, was designed to include provision
of crèche facilities at rural work sites if
more than five children below the age of six
were brought along by working mothers;
it also suggests that a woman should be
employed to look after children. Similarly,
in Ethiopia, the PSNP was designed to take
into account women’s work-related time
constraints (Berhane et al., 2013). In theory,
women are allowed to work fewer hours
each day, arriving late and leaving early if
they need to provide care for children at
home. Furthermore, the programme calls

for provision of day care centres at public
works sites, and allows pregnant and nursing
women to receive direct support with no
work requirement.
Unfortunately, the care that has gone into
programme design has not always ensured
corresponding implementation. Programmes
have therefore not been very successful in
overcoming women’s time constraints. In
India, for example, there is limited awareness
of the MGNREGA crèche provision and,
according to several sources, actual provision
of a crèche at work sites is very rare (Holmes
et al., 2014). A survey in four northern Indian
states (Pankaj and Tankha, 2010) found that
only 28 percent of women with children
under the age of five brought them to the
work site, whereas 62 percent left their
children at home with older siblings or other
relatives, and 10 percent left them without
proper care. In many cases, this was due to
respondents being unaware of the crèche
provision. But the women may also have
preferred to leave their children with family
or neighbours in their community rather
than with strangers at public works sites. This
has also been found in other public works
programmes, which highlights the need to
provide day care at the community level when
wage employment is introduced in this way.
Ethiopia’s PSNP has also struggled to
implement its gender-sensitive design.
Public works officials in eight of ten woredas
(districts) reported that no steps had been
taken to enable women’s participation
(Berhane et al., 2013). Day care centres had
been successfully introduced in only three
regions: Amhara, Tigray, and Southern
Nations, Nationalities and Peoples’ Region.
Implementation problems have been
attributed to several factors, including
insufficient funds, implementers’ lack of
awareness (or deprioritization) of the
programme’s crèche provision and limited
demand from women participants, some
of whom may have been concerned about
leaving their children with strangers (Holmes
and Jones, 2013).
There is room for improvement, and it is
the purpose of monitoring and evaluation
to facilitate this. For example, the emerging
consensus is that in order to maximize
programme impacts, it is vital to consider,
complement and strengthen the different
strands of support that address the multiple

33

34

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

constraints and disadvantages women face,
particularly in rural areas. There are myriad
ways to accomplish this task, ranging from
ensuring that infrastructure improvements
meet women’s needs, to addressing gender
gaps in access to education, financial services
and productive resources, to improving
access to relevant social services, including
prenatal and postnatal maternity care and
child care.
BRAC’s CFPR-TUP (Challenging the
Frontiers of Poverty Reduction – Targeting
the Ultra Poor) programme in Bangladesh
is based on a better understanding of
the gendered dimensions of poverty and
vulnerability, and explicitly attempts to
address them.15 An example of good practice,
the programme targets ultra-poor rural
households and provides women in those
households with productive assets, primarily
livestock.16 The programme also provides
additional benefits in a sequenced manner.
For example, consumption support in the
initial stages, for 12–18 months, is considered
key to the success of the programme, as
assets do not immediately generate income
(Sabates-Wheeler and Devereux, 2011).
Households are also provided with savings
services, weekly home visits and training (on
how to use their assets, health and hygiene
matters, basic skills and literacy), as well as
general support and counselling (including
how to handle gender violence, early
marriage and dowry pressures). Households
are also provided with health care support
and assistance in social integration.
The programme holds lessons, not only
for gender-sensitive social protection
programming, but also, more generally,
when programmes seek to sustainably
“graduate” households out of poverty. We
return to these lessons in Chapters 4 and 5.

15
BRAC, formerly the Bangladesh Rural Advancement
Committee, is a NGO that today operates in Bangladesh
and several other countries.
16
The programme started in 2002 and had reached
100 000 ultra-poor households by 2006. It is intended to
provide support to 770 300 households by 2016. Ultrapoor households are those that suffer from chronic hunger
and malnutrition, have inadequate shelter, and are highly
prone to many types of disease, deprived of education and
particularly vulnerable to recurring natural disasters.

Key messages
• Social protection programmes, regardless
of type, can effectively reduce poverty,
especially the depth of poverty.
• Social protection programmes, regardless
of type, can effectively reduce food
insecurity. Programmes help raise
consumption levels and result in greater
dietary diversity at the household level.
• Women are often the main beneficiaries
of social protection programmes, and
play a key role in household food
security and nutrition. Programmes
that target women, consider their time
constraints and enhance their control
over income have stronger food security
and nutrition impacts, especially for
children.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

3. The potential impacts of social
protection on investment
and growth
Social assistance can be an effective tool for
raising the level of consumption of the poor
and reducing their food insecurity, as shown
in the previous chapter. But social protection
does more than fill income and consumption
shortfalls; it also facilitates productive
investment (Barrientos, 2010) and, thus,
can increase income-generating capacity.
Such investment is essential for sustainable
poverty reduction because those who possess
the means to invest are generally better
able and more willing to access credit and
complementary resources and services to
undertake investments in new production
assets and technologies and new marketing
relations, as well as in education and health
care for children. This chapter explains why
social protection is relevant for household
productive investment, and reviews the
substantial body of evidence accumulated
on the effectiveness of social protection in
stimulating investment.

Why and how would social
protection stimulate investment?
There is a sound theoretical basis for
expecting social protection to have
productive impacts on agriculture.17 Many
poor households’ livelihoods are still
based on agriculture, many on subsistence
agriculture. This is particularly true in subSaharan Africa, now and for the foreseeable
future. Many of these farmers live in places
where markets – for agricultural inputs
and outputs, labour, and other goods and
services such as credit and insurance – are
lacking or do not function well (Tirivayi,
Knowles and Davis, 2013). Moreover, the
17
For a review, see Tirivayi, Knowles and Davis (2013). A
substantial body of evidence on these linkages has come
out of the “From Protection to Production“ (PtoP) project.

uncertainties of weather, particularly
in the context of climate change, and
lack of affordable insurance are at the
heart of the vulnerabilities of households
dependent on agricultural livelihoods. In
circumstances such as market failure or a
risky environment, and where the household
is largely responsible for generating its own
livelihood, interventions meant to influence
household consumption will also affect
household production decisions, and vice
versa – the decisions cannot be separated.
This can be clearly seen when looking at the
choice between a high-risk, high-profit cash
crop, and a low-risk, low-yield subsistence
crop when facing food insecurity, or tradeoffs between investing in nutritious foods,
children’s education or livestock.
Without access to credit markets, and with
poor alternative risk-coping mechanisms,
the time horizon of agricultural households
shortens when their very survival is
threatened. As a result, they often adopt
low-risk, low-return agricultural and
other income-generating strategies, and
may sell more labour off-farm in casual
labour markets to obtain liquidity or more
secure income (Dercon, 2002). For similar
reasons, households may underinvest in the
education and health of their children, or
adopt negative risk-coping strategies such as
distress sales of assets, reducing the quantity
and quality of food consumption, taking
children out of school, or even begging.
In this context, social protection can affect
investment decisions via three pathways:
managing risks; relaxing liquidity, credit and
savings constraints; and spillover effects into
the community and local economy (Alderman
and Yemtsov, 2014; Tirivayi, Knowles and
Davis, 2013).
First, social protection can help households
manage risk. Social protection instruments
provided at regular and predictable intervals

35

36

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

can increase certainty and security for
agricultural households, partially substituting
for insurance and providing a crucial source
of liquidity. Poor rural households actively
manage risks using tools at their disposal,
such as mutual support and informal risksharing mechanisms as well as self-insurance
(see Box 9). Extensive research suggests,
however, that these risk management
strategies offer only partial insurance to the
poor and typically do not offer sufficient
protection against economic downturns,
climate shocks and serious health shocks
(Dercon, 2011). Regular and predictable
social protection instruments can encourage
households to make investments and take
advantage of economic opportunities they
would otherwise consider too risky. Social
protection can also reduce reliance on
negative risk-coping strategies in the face of
shocks.
Second, social protection programmes that
provide cash can facilitate household saving
and alleviate credit and liquidity constraints,
and if payments are regular and predictable,
they can improve access to credit by serving
as collateral (Barrientos, 2012). These
constraints are key factors leading poor

agricultural households to less-than-optimal
use of types and quantities of inputs. Poor
households, and particularly women, often
find it difficult to borrow money due to lack
of collateral or the relatively high expense of
small loans. Relaxing these constraints frees
up households to use the assets they have at
their disposal more effectively.
Third, the impact of social protection
programmes is also felt in the communities
and local economy in which these
programmes are implemented. Social
protection allows households to renew or
strengthen their participation in informal
social networks for risk-sharing and
reciprocal exchange; while limited in its
effectiveness, social protection often serves
as the initial source of help in the face
of shocks. Social protection interventions
can also influence the behaviour of
non-beneficiary households, such as by
encouraging more regular school attendance
and more frequent health checks (Fiszbein
et al., 2009). Properly conducted public
works programmes can provide important
public infrastructure and assets to facilitate
household investment and economic activity
(Alderman and Yemtsov, 2014).

BOX 9
Social risk management
Risk is a central part of agricultural
household decision-making. Alderman
and Paxson (1992), for example, described
two main ways that households deal with
risk: risk management and risk-coping.
Risk management is when households, in
the absence of perfect insurance markets,
employ strategies to reduce income
variability. These may include crop and
field diversification, choosing activities
that are less remunerative, but also less
risky, and migration by family members.
Risk-coping involves smoothening
consumption in the event of shocks
through savings, risk-sharing with others
or adverse coping strategies such as taking
children out of school.
The World Bank’s first Social Protection
and Labour Strategy, published in 2001,
established Social Risk Management (SRM)
(based on Holzmann and Jørgensen, 2000)

as a conceptual framework that identified
risk and vulnerability as major drivers of
poverty (World Bank, 2012). Strategies
to deal with risk are classified as: (1) risk
reduction, i.e. ex-ante actions to raise
income or reduce income variability; (2)
risk mitigation, i.e. ex-ante actions to
reduce income variability if and when a
shock occurs; and (3) risk-coping, i.e. expost actions to alleviate the impacts of
shocks after they occur.
Although SRM continues to be
relevant to agriculture-based livelihoods
and provides a coherent set of policy
options for addressing risks that farmers,
pastoralists, agricultural labourers and
other rural people face, it has been
criticized for its almost exclusively
economic focus, and for ignoring social
risks and the structural causes of poverty
and food insecurity (HLPE, 2012).

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

Moreover, the increased incomes of
beneficiary households can lead to multiplier
effects for the local economy. The extra
disposable income is spent on goods such as
livestock products and simple agricultural
and household goods and services, which
may be produced and provided locally, often
by non-beneficiary households. Many of
these goods are only traded within a small
area, either because they are perishable or
because of transportation costs. When social
protection programmes generate additional
income that creates demand for locally
produced goods and services, they contribute
to virtuous circles where agricultural and
rural non-farm income growth reinforce
each other. The degree of the impact will
depend on the availability of local resources,
including labour, that can supply the goods
and services needed to meet additional
demand without significant price increases.

Social protection has the potential to
have a broad range of impacts related to
household income-generating activities. These
impacts range from improvements in human
resources, increased levels of savings and
access to credit, increased farm and non-farm
investment and production, more flexibility in
allocation of household labour, strengthened
social networks, and income multipliers in the
local economy. Social protection measures
can help households maintain consumption
levels and retain assets when confronted by
shocks, reduce negative risk-coping strategies
and enable them to take on higher-risk but
higher-return livelihood strategies. Moreover,
taken together, these potential impacts reduce
household vulnerability and strengthen
resilience (see Box 10). Below, we present
evidence of the impacts that social assistance
can have on household investment, labour
supply and choice of economic activities.

BOX 10
Contribution of social protection to resilience
In relation to agriculture, food security and
nutrition, resilience is essentially about the
inherent capacities (abilities) of individuals,
groups, communities and institutions
to withstand, cope, recover, adapt and
transform in the face of specific shocks.
Efforts to strengthen resilience should
primarily target the food-insecure or those
at risk of becoming so. In most cases, this
means individuals and groups in rural
areas living in extreme poverty or close
to the poverty line, as well as those living
where conflicts, natural disasters or other
major shocks can disrupt food systems or
impede access to adequate and nutritious
food for at least part of the population.
The type of population group, its
livelihood strategies and asset bases, the
institutional environment, and the type of
shock or stressor, all inform the practical
definition of “resilience” in each context.
Resilience-building options must
be country- and context-specific, with
different entry points used in various
situations. Any approach to enhancing
resilience should integrate disaster risk
reduction/management, prevention,
mitigation, disaster preparedness and

response in a comprehensive way.
Prevention is critical to avoid damage,
protect development gains, maintain
poor people’s incomes and assets on
which livelihoods are based, and reduce
the frequency and impact of shocks.
Vulnerability is reduced through physical
and socio-economic measures, better landuse planning, equitable access to resources
and weather-risk transfer mechanisms.
Social protection – by ameliorating
market constraints and helping households
manage risk, contributes to enhancing
human resources, promoting household
livelihoods and revitalizing community
social networks and the local economy
– has the potential to strengthen the
different dimensions of resilience among
both individuals and communities.
Social protection aimed specifically
at increasing resilience against climate
change, for example, by mobilizing
labour for public works to produce
environmentally friendly and beneficial
assets, and sensitizing communities on land
use management, is referred to as adaptive
social protection (Devereux, 2015).

37

38

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Social protection can stimulate
investment in human resources
and productive activities
The most important resource that poor
households have is their own labour; we
therefore turn first to the evidence on the
impact of social protection on the quality of
labour, as reflected in improved nutrition,
education and health outcomes. Subsequent
sections review the evidence linking social
protection to investment in household
farm assets and resources, to savings and to
entrepreneurial activity, before moving to
the wider community and economic impacts
of social protection.

Enhancing human resources: nutrition,
education and health
The empirical evidence presented in
Chapter 2 shows that social assistance
programmes, regardless of type, tend to
have a sizeable impact on food security and
dietary diversity, in particular with regard
to the consumption of animal products. But
how well do social protection programmes
improve the different dimensions of human
resources such as health, education and
nutrition?
Reviews by Manley, Gitter and Slavchevska
(2013) and Ruel and Alderman (2013)
find that conditional and unconditional
cash transfers often have positive impacts
on consumption levels and diversity but,
in general, they have little impact on
nutritional outcomes. They argue that social
protection programmes are more likely
to have nutrition impacts when targeted
at the poorest and most vulnerable and
accompanied by other interventions that
target health, sanitation and maternal
education. They find that unconditional
transfers can also be effective and that
conditionality appears to be much less
important than other issues, such as the age
and sex of children in the household and
access to health care. Finally, better quality
of service delivery, in addition to better
targeting, would improve the nutritional
outcomes of cash transfer programmes.
One example of a social protection
intervention that did have a nutrition impact
is the Mexican PROGRESA/Oportunidades/
Prospera programme, which provides
regular cash transfers and nutritional

supplements18 upon completion of health
clinic visits, nutrition interventions and
school attendance. The programme’s positive
impact on nutrition is reflected in improved
child physical, cognitive and language
development (Fernald, Gertler and Neufeld,
2008). More specifically, the programme has
resulted in higher mean growth for children
aged 12–36 months and lower probability
of stunting. The improved child growth
associated with PROGRESA/Oportunidades/
Prospera is conservatively estimated to
increase lifetime earnings by 2.9 percent.
The effect is likely to be higher when the
impacts of improved nutritional status on
cognitive development, increased schooling,
and lowered age of completing given levels
of schooling are considered (Behrman
and Hoddinott, 2005; Fernald, Gertler and
Neufeld, 2008). The positive impact of the
programme is, in part, attributed to the fact
that it not only targeted women as recipients
of the cash transfers, but also raised their
knowledge and awareness of health and
nutrition. For children under five years of
age in the programme localities, health
visits increased by 18 percent, reducing
illnesses by 12 percent. Furthermore, higher
and more diverse food consumption (see
Chapter 2) was accompanied by a range
of complementary interventions such as
nutritional supplements and health care
that also contributed to the success of the
programme (Ruel and Alderman, 2013;
Skoufias, 2005).
School feeding is a common intervention
that helps children learn, and can also
contribute to improved nutritional status
for disadvantaged children. For example,
evidence from randomized controlled trials in
China, Jamaica and Kenya, found that, over
a 19-month period, children fed at school
gained an average of 0.39 kg more than
those who did not receive supplementary
feeding (Kristjansson et al., 2006). There is
also evidence showing that iron-rich school
meals can improve iron nutrition, especially
for adolescent girls (Ruel and Alderman,
2013). In Uganda, according to Adelman
et al. (2008), girls aged 10–13 benefiting
from school feeding experienced significant
declines in mild anaemia prevalence relative
18
For children between the ages of four months and two
years as well as for pregnant and breastfeeding women.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

to a control group. Including certain types
of foods has also enhanced the effectiveness
of school-feeding programmes. For example,
including biofortified orange-fleshed sweet
potato, which is high in betacarotene, into
a South African school-feeding programme
raised levels of vitamin A intake (van
Jaarsveld et al., 2005). In a controlled primaryschool-feeding study in Kenya, children
receiving milk and/or meat supplements with
mid-morning snacks had higher intakes of
several nutrients, including vitamins A and
B12, calcium, iron and zinc, as well as dietary
energy (Murphy et al. 2003; Neumann et
al. 2003). Fortifying rice served in school
lunches in India led to statistically significant
declines in iron-deficiency anaemia, from 30
to 15 percent for the treatment group, while
anaemia remained essentially unchanged for
the control group (Moretti et al., 2006).
Both conditional and unconditional cash
transfers have been shown to improve
school enrolment and attendance, as well
as health outcomes. Mexico’s PROGRESA/
Oportunidades/Prospera conditional cash
transfer programme increased secondary
school enrolment by six percentage points
for boys and nine percentage points for
girls. In Bangladesh, a small programme
targeting the hardest-to-reach children
increased primary school enrolment by
nine percentage points. And in Nicaragua,
the (now discontinued) Red de Protección
social protection programme increased
overall enrolment by 13 percentage points,
enrolment of children from the very poorest
households by 25 percentage points and
regular primary school attendance by 20
percentage points. Conditional cash transfer
programmes have also had significant
impacts on health. For example, in Colombia
and Ecuador, social protection programmes
bolstered health centre visits for children by
33 and 20 percent, respectively. In Honduras,
parents increased the use of health services
for young children by 15–21 percentage
points, although no effects on children’s
illness rates were found, as in Brazil (Adato
and Hoddinott, 2007).
Unconditional cash transfers in subSaharan Africa have had a strong and
consistent impact on school enrolment,
particularly among boys and girls of
secondary school age (12–17 years), who face
the largest financial barriers to schooling.

For example, Ghana’s LEAP programme,
Kenya’s CT-OVC, Lesotho’s CGP and Zambia’s
Child Grant model raised enrolment among
secondary-school-aged children by 7, 8, 6
and 9 percentage points, respectively. Similar
impacts were found for other cash transfer
programmes (Handa and de Milliano,
2015). Although these programmes are
unconditional, their impacts are similar
in magnitude to those of the influential
PROGRESA/Oportunidades/Prospera
programme in Mexico, which conditioned
transfers on school attendance. In the subSaharan African context, key factors that
raise the impact on children are the transfer
amount, with a threshold of 20 percent of
pre-transfer income being especially critical,
and the degree of “messaging” about the
purpose of the transfer. For example, several
programmes, such as Kenya’s CT-OVC and
Lesotho’s CGP, include strong messaging
that the transfers are intended to support
children’s welfare, which has been found to
be effective.
Unconditional cash transfer programmes
in sub-Saharan Africa have also had a
consistently significant impact in reducing
morbidity, and a positive if less consistent
impact on the use of health care.
Programmes in Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi,
South Africa, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Zambia all reduced morbidity
in children by reducing the incidence of
diarrhoea (for young children) or other
illnesses, with impacts ranging from 15
percentage points in Lesotho to 5 percentage
points in both South Africa and Zambia. In
both Ghana and Kenya, the programmes led
to increased use of preventive care.
Baird et al. (2013) found that programmes
with stronger conditionality requirements,
monitoring and/or penalization for noncompliance tended to have larger impacts
on school enrolment and attendance than
programmes with less or no enforcement
or emphasis. However, such programme
features are costly and challenging
to implement. In sub-Saharan Africa,
conditioning cash payments on school
enrolment has not been widely implemented
because of supply-side constraints and
difficulties in monitoring conditions. But
there are opportunities to leverage cash
transfers to enhance impacts on schooling
without imposing conditions, for example

39

40

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

by providing complementary services such
as textbooks, uniforms or peer-support
networks that are linked to schooling and
that provide additional support for families
to invest in human resources (Handa and de
Milliano, 2015).

Strengthening women’s role in
enhancing human resources through
social protection
The important role of women in household
food security and nutrition as well as in
the education and health of their children
in much of the world has already been
emphasized in Chapter 2. Social protection
programmes have played an important part
in strengthening this role. This has occurred
by involving women in decision-making at
the programme design, implementation
and institutional levels (such as communitylevel committees such as the kebele
(neighbourhood) appeal committees in
Ethiopia). In addition, programmes have also
aimed to reduce gender inequalities as an
explicit part of programme objectives, thus
obliging programmes to adopt measures
to increase women’s control and decisionmaking over financial resources (as with
Brazil’s Bolsa Família); design effective
ways to increase women’s income (Kenya’s
HSNP and Bangladesh’s IGVD); and establish
women’s support groups (BRAC).
Examples exist of social protection
programming initiatives aimed at improving
women’s voice by including them in
programme governance. In Peru, women
are well represented in the project selection
committees of the Rural Roads Project
(Okola, 2011). In Pakistan, the flagship
CCT Benazir Income Support Programme
(BISP) is seeking to actively involve women
beneficiaries through a social mobilization
pilot (ACT International, 2013). The pilot
aims to develop women’s committees at
different administrative levels (village,
union council and tehsil [a subdistrict,
consisting of several villages and towns]),
train women to know their rights, enable
women’s leaders to participate in monthly
meetings, liaise with BISP local offices and
other government agencies, and become
involved in participatory monitoring activities
(Naqvi, 2013). Similar efforts are underway
in Bangladesh, where BRAC’s CFPR-TUP
programme enables women beneficiaries

to participate in weekly meetings (at which
the cash stipend is disbursed) and discuss
problems related to their small businesses,
health and social care (Holmes et al., 2010).
However, implementing social protection
programme goals in relation to women’s
participation is still a challenge. In India, for
example, the MGNREGA programme provides
for the inclusion of women representatives
in the gram sabha,19 social audit fora, and
state- and central-level councils. It also
suggests that social audit fora should be
scheduled to maximize the involvement
of women and marginalized communities
(Holmes et al., 2014). However, several
studies confirm the low rate of women’s
participation in decision-making structures.
In Himachal Pradesh and in Rajasthan, for
instance, Khera and Nayak (2009) found
that women reported not attending village
meetings because they found them of little
interest, or were unaware of when they were
taking place, or believed that, even if they
attended and voiced their concerns, nobody
would pay attention. In addition to cultural
norms that define gender roles, women’s low
levels of literacy, especially among the more
marginalized castes and tribal communities
(Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes), also
determined their non-participation.
This contrasts, however, with evidence
from Rwanda’s Vision 2020 Umurenge
Programme (VUP) (Pavanello, Pozarny and de
la O Campos, 2015), where the public works
programme was unexpectedly found to be
promoting women’s involvement. Women
who accessed VUP public works employment
found that it had positive repercussions
on their engagement in public life, due to
enhanced feelings of confidence and selfworth. Male non-beneficiaries interviewed
expressed similar perceptions. Despite these
perceptions and examples, this research
did not find evidence of women assuming
leadership roles in politics and public life as a
result of VUP public works participation.

19
The gram sabha includes all the adult citizens of the
village. It is empowered to elect the gram panchayat. The
sabha can influence decisions taken by the panchayat
and can modify weak decisions. The panchayat can be
established for a village with a population of 1 000–
25 000. Several small villages can be grouped into one
gram sabha. There are various committees, e.g. Agriculture,
Animal Husbandry, Public Works, Social Welfare, and
Health and Sanitation, within each gram sabha.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

Ethiopia’s PSNP also had only limited
success in fostering women’s inclusion
in decision-making fora. It actively
promotes women’s participation at all
levels and requires that women should
represent half of all members in kebele
(neighbourhood) appeal committees as
well as other committees and task forces.
However, women’s representation in these
structures remained relatively low (Seyoum,
2012). Although there was at least one
woman on the Kebele Food Security Task
Force (the main body tasked with food
security planning) in almost all surveyed
kebeles, women did not account for half
the committee members. Appropriate
design is important, but so is effective
implementation.

Social protection can increase household
savings and access to credit
In rural areas, the poor and vulnerable are
often locked in a vicious circle where they
must borrow money in the lean season to
buy food at higher prices but have to repay
after harvesting their crops, when prices
are lower. This is an example of how social
protection, by facilitating consumption
smoothening and through alleviating
liquidity constraints and helping households
build savings, can reduce uncertainty
and influence household spending and
risk-taking behaviour. Indeed, savings
significantly increase productive investments
by the poor, in particular by women (Dupas
and Robinson, 2009).
In Bangladesh, Ahmed, Quisumbing et
al. (2009) found that savings increased
considerably for households benefiting from
the IGVGD, FSVGD, FFA and especially, RMP
programmes.20 In part, this is because all
these programmes have mandatory savings
requirements, which are particularly high
for RMP participants. Evans et al. (2014)
report that, in the United Republic of
Tanzania, beneficiaries of the Community
Based Conditional Cash Transfers Programme
slightly increased their savings. Overall,
only 12 percent of households had nonbank savings initially, while participation in
the programme led to an increase of three
percentage points. Also, Zambia’s Child Grant

20

See Chapter 2 for more details on these programmes.

model had a positive impact on beneficiary
households’ savings (Daidone, Davis, Dewbre,
González-Flores et al., 2014). In Paraguay,
Soares, Ribas and Hirata (2008) found that
households benefiting from the Tekoparã
programme saved 20 percent more, with the
impact being stronger among the extreme
poor. Similarly, in Ghana, Handa et al. (2013)
reported that beneficiaries of the LEAP
programme were 11 percentage points more
likely to save money than non-beneficiaries.
Gahamanyi, Hartwig and Kettlewell (2014)
found that fewer than 7 percent of the
beneficiaries of Rwanda’s VUP used their
money to invest in other income-generating
activities but 33 percent of households
reported saving part of their transfers. This
programme provided financial education,
and credit and bank accounts were opened
for depositing wages and to promote
savings. Such financial inclusion, in the form
of opening savings accounts, has a strong
effect on savings behaviour (Bynner and
Paxton, 2001).
Households in poor rural communities
frequently save through informal
associations, such as the iddirs in Ethiopia.21
Social protection programmes can have a
significant role in promoting beneficiary
participation in social networks of this kind,
as discussed later in this chapter.
The available evidence also points to social
protection programmes facilitating access to
credit. Barca et al. (2015) found evidence that
six cash transfer programmes in sub-Saharan
Africa allowed households to be seen as
more financially trustworthy, increased their
creditworthiness and reduced their debt
levels. Greater creditworthiness can help
households obtain bridging credit from
traders, participate in groups or associations
that require regular contributions and
improve access to institutions (Barca et
al., 2015; OPM, 2014). In many cases,
however, households remain risk-averse
and reluctant to take advantage of their
greater access to credit. Handa et al. (2013)
and Daidone, Davis, Dewbre, GonzálezFlores et al. (2014) found that cash transfer

21
The iddir is the most inclusive and widespread social
network in Ethiopia. Its original function was to provide
funeral services and to support bereaved family members
morally and financially, but its scope is now much wider
(Abay, Kahsay and Berhane, 2014).

41

42

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

programmes in Ghana and Zambia led to
households reducing their borrowing and
paying off existing debt, while increasing
their savings. In Lesotho, the cash transfer
had no impact on credit, borrowing or debt
(Daidone, Davis, Dewbre and Covarrubias,
2014). Also, Paraguay’s Tekoparã programme
had a positive impact on access to credit,
but only for the moderately poor, not the
extremely poor. Beneficiary households
had, on average, 7 percent higher access to
credit than non-beneficiary households. In
rural areas, the impact was slightly larger –
between 8 and 10 percent, but again only
the moderately poor benefited in this way,
with no such impact on the extremely poor
(Soares, Ribas and Hirata, 2008).

Social protection can increase on-farm
investment and farm production
Social assistance can have a positive
impact on family farm production, as with
the Mexican PROCAMPO (now renamed
PROAGRO Productivo) and PROGRESA (now
Prospera) programmes (Ruiz et al., 2002),
likewise with the impacts of the significant
expansion from 1991 of retirement benefits
(social pensions) on the rural population of
Brazil (Delgado and Cardoso, 2004). Growing
evidence confirms that social protection
programmes do induce such investments.
The most recent and comprehensive review
of studies assessing the impact of social
protection, specifically social assistance,
on household assets (Hidrobo, Hoddinott,
Kumar and Olivier, 2014b) found that social
protection programmes led, on average,
to a 14 percent increase in the number of
households owning livestock, an 18 percent
increase in the total value of livestock held,
a 41 percent increase in the proportion of
households owning productive farm assets
and a significant increase in productive farm
assets owned. However, there was wide
variation in the outcomes, as evidenced by
the more detailed results below.
In Ethiopia, the PSNP increased livestock
holdings, with stronger impacts for
households that participated longer (Berhane
et al., 2011; Berhane et al., 2014). This impact
was dramatically higher for PSNP beneficiaries
who also participated in the Other Food
Security Programme (OFSP) and later the
Household Asset Building Programme
(HABP), which included access to credit;

assistance in obtaining livestock, bees, tools
and seeds; and assistance with irrigation or
water-harvesting schemes, soil conservation
and improvements in pastureland.
Households benefiting from both the PSNP
and the OFSP/HABP were 21 percentage
points more likely to use fertilizers than
households benefiting from neither. Among
households participating in the PSNP, access
to the OFSP/HABP raised the likelihood
of fertilizer use by 19 percentage points
and the probability of investing in stone
terracing by 13 percentage points (Berhane
et al., 2011). The Ethiopian experience shows
that it is possible to implement a large-scale
programme that builds assets even when
infrastructure and resources are limited
(Berhane et al., 2014).
For Bangladesh, three different
unconditional cash transfer programmes
that targeted the ultra-poor were compared
(Ahmed, Quisumbing et al., 2009): the IGVGD,
the FSVGD and the FFA, as well as one public
works programme, the RMP (see also Chapter
2). The average value of livestock holdings
for IGVGD and RMP participants increased by
96 and 108 percent, respectively, compared
with the control group; on the other hand,
there was no statistically significant increase
in the case of FSVGD and FFA participants.
Households that received training in and
undertook income-generating activities did
particularly well. The success of the IGVGD
programme and the RMP is explained by
their ability to help households overcome
the high cost of acquiring livestock – the
former by giving participants access to loans
through NGOs and the latter by making
relatively large and lumpy transfers. Only
the beneficiaries of the IGVGD programme
significantly increased renting or leasing of
land for cultivation. The reason, the authors
speculated, may be that the IGVGD is the only
programme that included a mechanism for
accessing credit.
The Zambia Child Grant model of the
SCT programme, which made relatively
large unconditional transfers of nearly
30 percent of per capita income, allowed
beneficiary households – 20 000 ultra-poor
households with children under five years of
age – to increase the area of land worked
by 18 percentage points (American Institutes
for Research, 2013). The programme also
increased ownership of a wide variety

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

of animals, both in terms of share of
households with livestock (a 21 percentage
point increase overall, from 49 percent at
the baseline) and in the total number of
different types of poultry. There was also a
significant positive impact on the ownership
of tools, while the share of households with
any expenditure on inputs (seeds, fertilizer
and hired labour) increased by 18 points
from a baseline share of 23 percent. These
investments led to a 50 percent increase in
the overall value of agricultural commodities
produced, which are primarily sold rather
than consumed on-farm. The programme
produced a household-level multiplier,
with the increase in per capita consumption
25 percent greater than the transfer itself
(Daidone, Davis, Dewbre, González-Flores
et al., 2014).
Lesotho’s CGP led to an increase in crop
input use and expenditures, with the share of
households using pesticides increasing from
12 to 20 percent. The increase in input use led
to an increase in maize production and, for
labour-constrained households, in sorghum
production, as well as in the frequency of
garden plot harvest (Daidone, Davis, Dewbre
and Covarrubias, 2014). In Kenya, there were
large and significant increases in the share
of smaller households (15.4 percentage
points) and female-headed households
(6.0 percentage points) owning small animals.
Beneficiary households, and especially smaller
households (which often included those
headed by women), consumed significantly
more cereals, animal products (meat and
dairy) and other food from own production
compared with the control group households
(Asfaw et al., 2014).
The Mchinji pilot of Malawi’s unconditional
Social Cash Transfer programme increased
goat and chicken ownership by 52 and
59 percent, respectively (Covarrubias,
Davis and Winters, 2012). Increases in
cattle ownership were significant, but of
much smaller magnitude. For the same
programme, beneficiary households invested
more in agricultural implements such as hoes,
sickles and axes. Ultimately, these households
were able to achieve a substantial increase
in agricultural production on their own
farms, resulting in higher consumption from
own production. The significant impact was
also a result of the size of the transfers,
which, at almost 30 percent of household

expenditures, was relatively large (Boone
et al., 2013).
The Plurinational State of Bolivia’s
BONOSOL social (non-contributory) pension
programme led beneficiary households to
increase agricultural investments for crop
production. In particular, female-headed
beneficiary households were 8.8 percentage
points more likely to purchase pesticides and
7.5 percentage points more likely to rent a
plough (Martínez, 2004).
In Mexico, PROGRESA/Oportunidades
(now Prospera) had large impacts on
agricultural assets from participation in the
conditional cash transfer programme. For
example, beneficiary households owning no
agricultural assets increased their use of land
for agricultural purposes by 15.3 percent.
Beneficiary households, in general, were
17.1 percent more likely to own draught
animals and 5.1 percent more likely to own
production animals compared with the
control households, with the effect stronger
for households owning no agricultural assets
before participation (Gertler, Martínez and
Rubio-Codina, 2012).
Finally, beneficiaries of Paraguay’s
Tekoporã conditional cash transfer
programme invested 45–50 percent more in
agricultural production and were 6 percent
more likely to acquire small livestock, such as
poultry and pigs, while there was no effect
for acquisition of larger animals such as
cattle (Soares, Ribas and Hirata, 2008).
These examples demonstrate that many
social protection programmes, regardless of
type, had positive impacts on the agricultural
investment decisions of family farmers, with
the magnitude of the impact varying for a
number of reasons related to programme
design as well as gender and socio-cultural
context (see also Box 11) (Tirivayi, Knowles
and Davis, 2013). However, not all studies
of social protection programmes found
positive impacts on investment and asset
accumulation. Maluccio (2010), for example,
found no impact on livestock and land
ownership from the (now discontinued)
Red de Protección Social programme in
Nicaragua; nor did Handa et al. (2013)
for Ghana. Qualitative data indicate that
unconditional cash transfers in Ghana
(LEAP) and Kenya (CT-OVC) stimulated asset
acquisitions for the better off, but not for
the poorest households (OPM, 2013a and

43

44

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

BOX 11
Gender plays an important role in investment decisions and productivity
Social protection programmes need to pay
particular attention to women farmers.
Despite the range of evidence that gender
equality and women’s empowerment
can increase agricultural productivity
and improve broader social outcomes,
the reality is that gaps remain between
men and women when it comes to
productivity and engagement in the rural
labour market (FAO, 2011; Croppenstedt,
Goldstein and Rosas, 2013). Women face
discrimination in the labour market; have
less access to productive assets, inputs,
resources and services, which limits their
agricultural productivity; and also face
other challenges including limited control
over assets and resources (including
labour), lower levels of education, far
greater domestic care responsibilities,
and limited social ties facilitating wage
employment. For example, in Malawi,
yields achieved on plots managed by
women are 25 percent lower than
on those plots managed by males.
Eighty percent of this gap is explained by
the lower levels of agricultural input use
on women’s plots, including fertilizer and
extension services (World Bank and ONE,
2014).
In Brazil, recognition of gender
inequalities in rural areas has led to
implementation of affirmative action
policies since 2003, including mandatory
joint ownership of land and, from 2004,
access to loans for investment regardless
of the amount of loans held by the family.
Because many women had no official

2013b). In Chapter 4, we return to this issue
and consider which factors may explain the
success and failures of some programmes.

Social protection can also stimulate nonfarm activities
Rural households, including farm
households, rely significantly on economic
activities and sources of income other than
agriculture (Davis, Di Giuseppe and Zezza,
2014) (see also Chapter 1). It is therefore
relevant that available evidence shows

documents and were typically excluded
by public policies, from 2004, the National
Women Rural Workers Documentation
Programme (PNDTR – Programa Nacional
de Documentação da Trabalhadora Rural)
ensured free access for women to a range
of documents, including birth certificates,
identity cards, labour cards, Individual
Taxpayer Registry, registration for social
security, fishing registry, Pronaf1 eligibility
declaration (DAP – Declaração de Aptidão
ao Pronaf) and registration in the Single
Registry for the Federal Government
Social Programmes (CadÚnico – Cadastro
Único para Programas Sociais). More than
1.2 million women have been assisted,
and 2.5 million documents have been
issued (Del Grossi and Marques, 2015).
These measures are supported by efforts
to increase the participation of women in
consultative and decision-making bodies.
Other measures include the “Actions
to Fight Violence Suffered by Farming
and Forest Working Women”, and the
Rural Women’s Productive Organization
Programme (POPMR – Programa de
Organização Produtiva das Mulheres
Rurais), which encourage women’s
economic organization and provide
support on matters such as management,
production, commercialization and
training.

1

Pronaf (Programa Nacional de Fortalecimento da
Agricultura Familiar) is the National Programme
for Strengthening Family Farming, discussed in
more detail in Chapter 5.

that social protection can encourage nonfarm investments by rural households. In
Bangladesh, for example, about 37 percent
of RMP participants started small business
enterprises (Ahmed, Quisumbing et al.,
2009). In Kenya, CT-OVC transfers enhanced
participation in non-farm enterprises by
seven percentage points for female-headed
households, while the effect was negative for
male-headed households (Asfaw et al., 2014).
In Zambia, the Child Grant model increased
the share of beneficiary households operating

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

a non-farm enterprise by 17 percentage
points; moreover, the programme doubled
the average number of months in operation
(of the non-farm enterprise), the value of
total monthly revenue and profit, and the
share of households owning business assets
(American Institutes for Research, 2013).
In South Africa, social pension beneficiaries
started new microenterprises or strengthened
existing ones (Du Toit and Neves, 2006), while
in Ethiopia, beneficiaries of both the PSNP
and the HABP were more likely to own and
run their own non-farm enterprises (Gilligan
et al., 2009).
Latin American evidence points to
the positive effects of social protection
programmes on off-farm investments. The
Mexican PROGRESA/Oportunidades/Prospera
programme increased the probability
of households operating a non-farm
microenterprise (Gertler, Martínez and RubioCodina, 2012; Todd, Winters and Hertz,
2010), while beneficiaries were 25 percent
more likely to become entrepreneurs
(Bianchi and Bobba, 2013). However, Brazil’s
Bolsa Família programme was only positively
associated with entrepreneurial investments
in urban areas, while no impact was observed
in rural areas (Lichand, 2010).
As with on-farm investment, not all social
assistance programmes have enhanced
off-farm enterprise activity by recipient
households. In Nicaragua, for example,
participation in the (now discontinued) Red
de Protección Social programme actually
decreased involvement in informal enterprise
(Maluccio, 2010), while there were no impacts
of cash transfer programmes in Ghana and
Lesotho (Handa et al., 2013; Daidone, Davis,
Dewbre and Covarrubias, 2014).

Social protection influences
household labour allocation
Social protection also has important
implications for the allocation of household
labour. The income effect produced by
the provision of social protection can lead
individuals to work less – indeed, this may be
the objective for elderly-headed households
or for child labour. Individuals may also
appear to work less, but instead substitute
labour for domestic chores or child care.
Further, social protection may facilitate

reallocation of labour away from casual
agricultural wage labour due to the lack of
other alternatives (Fink, Jack and Masiye,
2014). Social protection programmes may
require households to supply labour (e.g. in
the case of public works programmes) and/
or children to attend school, which may also
imply labour reallocation within households.
With increased investment in on-farm and
non-farm production, social protection can
lead to reallocation of labour to family
production activities. Overall, the evidence
suggests that social protection programmes
have had minor impacts on the overall labour
supply, but can lead to significant shifts
in labour reallocation within households.
Ultimately, the size and direction of the
impact depends on a variety of factors,
including household size, demographic
composition, the nature of the programme,
household economic activities and local
labour markets.
Evidence from conditional cash transfer
programmes in Latin America suggests that
the impact on labour supply is a modest
disincentive at most, while some programmes
reduce child labour (Fiszbein et al., 2009).
Many studies do not find a significant impact
on participation in wage employment by
males and females, but some find evidence
of a reallocation of household labour
between agriculture and non-agricultural
sectors. For example, Nicaragua’s (now
discontinued) Red de Protección Social
did not have an impact on labour market
participation, but slightly reduced the time
spent working by males (Maluccio and
Flores, 2005). The programme also led to a
reallocation of labour from agriculture to
higher-return non-agricultural employment
(Maluccio, 2010).
The Bolsa Família programme in Brazil
either had no effect on total hours worked
or, at most, created a slight disincentive
to work (de Brauw et al., 2015; Teixeira,
2010). The disincentive effect was greater
for informal and unpaid workers, with
irregular or no sources of income as well
as for women, and was more pronounced
when beneficiaries received more. Some
women substituted housework for wage
employment, perhaps because of low wages
and the relatively high time requirements of
meeting programme conditionalities (Ribas
and Soares, 2011; de Brauw et al., 2015).

45

46

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Bolsa Família has also led households to
move labour from formal-sector employment
to the informal sector (de Brauw et al., 2015),
perhaps due to households trying to “hide”
income by working in the informal sector to
remain eligible for the programme.
In Paraguay, the Tekoporã programme had
a negative impact on male labour supply,
possibly due to an increased reservation
wage22 for poor men, who reduced their
participation in casual labour (Soares, Ribas
and Hirata, 2008). In Mexico, however,
PROGRESA/Oportunidades/Prospera did
not affect the adult labour supply, nor does
the Programa Apoyo Alimentario food aid
programme (targeting areas not covered by
Oportunidades), which provides either cash
or in-kind transfers. However, transfers by
both programmes have led to a significant
switch by males (but not females) out of
agriculture and into higher-return nonagricultural activities (Skoufias, Unar and
González-Cossío, 2008; Alzúa, Cruces and
Ripani, 2012).
Evidence from unconditional cash transfers
in sub-Saharan Africa also reveals a mixed
picture. Old-age pension schemes had varied
impacts in South Africa, although they
appear to have led to an overall reduction in
participation by the elderly. Several studies
found either no or a negative effect on
labour supply (see, for example, Ranchhod,
2006). On the other hand, after accounting
for migration, such transfers increased labour
market participation for some households, as
pensions helped support migrants until they
became self-sufficient, while older pensioners
could care for small children, thus freeing
younger adults to look for work elsewhere
(Ardington, Case and Hosegood, 2009).
In Malawi and Zambia and, to a lesser
extent, in Kenya, cash transfer programmes
led to a shift from agricultural wage
labour to on-farm activities for adults. In
Zambia, the Child Grant transfer led family
members to reduce their participation in,
and the intensity of, agricultural wage
labour. The impact was particularly strong
for women, amounting to a 17 percentage
point reduction in participation and 12
fewer days a year. Both men and women
increased the time they spent on family

agricultural and non-agricultural businesses
(Daidone, Davis, Dewbre, González-Flores
et al., 2014). In Malawi, the SCT programme
led to a substantial drop in participation
(by 61 percent, according to the second
follow-up survey) in low-skilled agricultural
wage labour, as recipients switched from
ganyu23 labour due to the lack of other
alternatives to own-farm agricultural
production (Covarrubias, Davis and Winters,
2012). In Kenya (Asfaw et al., 2014) and
Lesotho (Daidone, Davis, Dewbre and
Covarrubias, 2014), this shift varied by age
and gender, while in Ghana (Handa et al.,
2013), the LEAP programme also increased
on-farm activities. This shift was consistently
reported in qualitative field work in Ghana,
Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi and Zimbabwe
(Barca et al., 2015). In Ethiopia, there
was no negative labour supply effect for
households with access to both the PSNP and
a complementary package of agricultural
services and inputs (Gilligan, Hoddinott and
Taffesse, 2008).
When social protection programmes –
particularly public works programmes – are
large enough, they can tighten urban and
rural labour markets, pushing up unskilled
labour wages. In some contexts, this can
reduce worker exploitation by raising the
reservation wage. For example, the Meket
Livelihoods Development Project, a cashfor-work transfer programme in Ethiopia,
enabled poor households to renegotiate
contractual sharecropping and livestock
arrangements with richer households
(Adams and Kebede, 2005). By setting the
wage above the local casual labour rate,
the MGNREGA public works programme in
India encouraged people to withdraw from
exploitative casual labour such as bonded
labour (McCord, 2012). In addition, by
paying men and women equal wages, the
programme narrowed the gender wage gap;
wages for female casual labourers increased
by 8 percent in participating districts
compared with non-participating districts
(Azam, 2012).
However, public works programmes can
also distort local labour markets if the wages
paid are higher than the prevailing rates,
thereby creating labour deficits in other

22
The reservation wage is the minimum wage at which a
labourer will accept employment.

23
Ganyu labour is a type of low-wage casual labour
performed in Malawi.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

productive sectors (Creti, 2010; McCord,
2012). The MGNREGA programme has
actually eased seasonal fluctuations in labour
demand and thus stabilized wage rates
(Shariff, 2009; Creti, 2010). Yet, setting the
wages in public works programmes at the
prevailing local rates in the very poor lowwage environments in most sub-Saharan
African countries could undermine the
programmes’ food security objective as it
might draw off agricultural wage labour
(Barrett, Holden and Clay, 2005).

Social protection tends to reduce child
labour
Most, but not all evidence shows that
social protection programmes can reduce
child labour. In Latin America, two major
systematic reviews found that most
conditional cash transfer programmes
significantly lowered child labour (IEG,
2011; Fiszbein et al., 2009). In Paraguay, the
Tekoporã programme had no significant
impact on child labour, while it improved
school attendance (Soares, Ribas and
Hirata, 2008). On the other hand, the
former Nicaraguan Red de Protección Social
programme reduced child work by three
to five percentage points among children
aged 7–13 years (Maluccio and Flores, 2005).
Frequently, impacts on child labour have
been mainly among older children. The
Mexican PROGRESA/Oportunidades/Prospera
programme, for example, reduced child
work among children aged 12–17 years,
especially among boys, and increased school
enrolment at the junior high school level
(Skoufias and Parker, 2001). Similar findings
have been reported in studies evaluating
two conditional cash transfer programmes in
Cambodia and Pakistan, two school-feeding
programmes in Bangladesh and Burkina Faso,
one unconditional cash transfer programme
in Ecuador and two education fee waiver/
scholarship programmes in Colombia and
Indonesia (IEG, 2011).
In sub-Saharan Africa, many unconditional
cash transfer programmes have been
associated with large reductions in child
labour. In South Africa, children residing in
households with a resident eligible for an
old-age pension reduced their total hours
of work by 33 percent (Edmonds, 2006; IEG,
2011). In Kenya, the CT-OVC programme
substantially reduced child labour on family

farms, especially for boys (Asfaw et al.,
2014; OPM, 2013b), while in Lesotho the
CGP programme also reduced child labour
on farms (Daidone, Davis, Dewbre and
Covarrubias, 2014). Other studies reported
similar findings from the LEAP programme
in Ghana (OPM 2013a). In Malawi, however,
the SCT programme reduced child wage
labour outside the household while it rose
inside the household, as younger children
replaced adults in performing chores, caring
for other household members and working
on the farm; nevertheless, this was combined
with a substantial rise in school attendance
(Covarrubias, Davis and Winters, 2012). The
Zambia Child Grant model had no clear
impacts on child labour (Daidone, Davis,
Dewbre, González-Flores et al., 2014). In
Ethiopia, the PSNP public works scheme had
mixed impacts in rural areas: increasing the
amount of time children worked for pay
and the time that girls spent studying, but
reducing the total hours spent on all types
of work (including household chores) by
children (Woldehanna, 2009).

Social protection facilitates
participation in social networks
Social protection interventions have
consequences beyond the household as
they spill over into the local community and
economy. These spillover effects may be
facilitated by social networks, which help
overcome credit and liquidity constraints,
and through which poor households can
manage risk through informal exchanges or
transfers among extended families, friends
and neighbours.24 In Ethiopia, for example,
membership in informal savings associations
(iddir) – whose main function is to help
members during bereavements or at other
difficult times – improves household access to
land, labour and credit markets by between 7
and 11 percentage points (Abay, Kahsay and
Berhane, 2014). In Mexico (Angelucci et al.,
2009), households belonging to an extended
family network shared resources and were
more able to smoothen consumption over
time than their neighbours who had no
close relatives in the village; they were also
24
The spillover effects that social networks help facilitate
are not only economic but also social in nature.

47

48

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

more able to undertake lumpy investments,
such as for education for their children. As a
consequence, better connected households
accumulated more resources over time
than their isolated, but otherwise similar,
neighbours.
Empirical evidence is emerging on the links
between social protection interventions and
increased participation in social networks.
The Tekoporã programme in Paraguay
increased participation in trade unions,
cooperatives or producer organizations, as
well as religious groups, by between six and
ten percentage points. Social participation
by the extremely poor increased by seven
to nine percentage points, whereas
participation by the moderately poor did
not change significantly (Soares, Ribas and
Hirata, 2008).
Unconditional cash transfer programmes
appeared to enable re-entry into existing
social networks, as beneficiaries were
viewed more favourably and felt to be
more trustworthy by other community
members, which, for some, has boosted
income-generating activities and overall
economic opportunities, social status and
self-esteem, as well as connectedness with
other community members. These aspects
have both direct and indirect impacts
on household resilience and sustainable
livelihoods. For six cash transfer programmes
in sub-Saharan Africa (Barca et al., 2015),25
predictably regular payments often improved
beneficiaries’ access to social networks, but
active participation in decision-making was
particularly difficult for elderly, immobile or
illiterate beneficiaries.
The Lesotho CGP significantly strengthened
reciprocity arrangements around foodsharing while reducing remittances received
from family members living outside the
community (Daidone, Davis, Dewbre and
Covarrubias, 2014). In Malawi, private
transfers to cash transfer beneficiaries
decreased by 32 percent, mostly due to a
decline in cash and in-kind gifts from friends
and family, rather than from remittances
(Covarrubias, Davis and Winters, 2012).
25
The synthesis report covers the following cash transfer
programmes: Ethiopia’s Social Cash Transfer Pilot
Programme (SCTPP), Ghana’s (LEAP), Kenya’s (CT-OVC),
Lesotho’s (CGP), Malawi’s (SCT) and Zimbabwe’s (HSCT).

In Ethiopia (Berhane et al., 2011), there
was no evidence that the PSNP reduced
or replaced private transfers. However, an
earlier study (Gilligan et al., 2009) found that
the programme sometimes replaced private
transfers when payments were regular, and
reduced private transfers when payments
were irregular. On the other hand, there
is no evidence that food aid and food-forwork crowded out private transfers among
pastoralists in Ethiopia and Kenya (Lentz
and Barrett, 2005). In South Africa, old-age
pensioners experienced a 25–30 percent
decline in private transfers from their
children once they began to receive their
pensions (Jensen 2003; IEG 2011).
Latin America offers further evidence of
the impact of social protection programmes
on private transfers. Thus, the (now
discontinued) Red de Protección Social
programme in Nicaragua did not replace
private transfers such as gifts and loans
(Maluccio and Flores, 2005). In Mexico,
the PROGRESA/Oportunidades/Prospera
programme’s impacts on private transfers
have varied with programme duration. After
six months, the programme crowded out
private transfers to beneficiary households
(Albarran and Attanasio, 2002), while
other evidence shows that after 19 months
the programme did not have this effect
(Teruel and Davis, 2000). The programme
increased the flow of private transfers
to non-beneficiary households in target
communities by 33 percent, compared
with non-beneficiary households in control
communities (Angelucci and De Giorgi, 2009;
IEG, 2011).
Social protection programmes can also
create tensions in local communities. In
Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, the United Republic
of Tanzania and Zimbabwe, unconditional
cash transfer programmes led to jealousies
and tensions between beneficiaries and
non-beneficiaries (OPM, 2013a; OPM, 2013b;
Barca et al., 2015; Pellerano et al., 2014;
Evans et al., 2014). For Mexico’s former
PROGRESA, there have been reports of
tensions between beneficiaries and nonbeneficiaries. Often, non-beneficiaries
did not understand why they had been
excluded and this resentment came to
the fore especially around the time when
beneficiaries collected their payment

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

(Adato, 2000). These tensions are largely
attributed to actual or perceived targeting
errors, lack of transparency in the selection
process and poor communication.

Public works provide local
infrastructure and other
community assets
Public works programmes are designed to
alleviate poverty and hardship by offering or
guaranteeing employment for the provision
of community-level assets, in particular,
infrastructure, land management and social
services (Subbarao et al., 2013). Supply of
public goods is generally a secondary, but
nevertheless key, objective; when properly
implemented, these programmes can
crucially complement household investment
(Alderman and Yemtsov, 2014). The
Ethiopian PSNP, for instance, facilitated the
rehabilitation of over 167 000 hectares of
land and 275 000 kilometres of stone and
soil embankments, and planted more than
900 million seedlings (World Bank, 2012).
Local irrigation projects under the PSNP
increased the amount of water available
for agriculture (Subbarao et al., 2013). In
Bangladesh, road improvement projects
led to a 27 percent increase in agricultural
wages, an 11 percent increase in per capita
consumption and a rise in school enrolment
for girls and boys (Khandker, Bakht, and
Koolwal, 2006).
Public works programmes can provide
important opportunities to improve genderresponsive community infrastructure and
assets. Some social protection programmes
explicitly recognize the linkages between
infrastructure and women’s empowerment
and support the development of broader
gender-responsive community assets that
improve women’s access to resources such
as water and fuel, in addition to saving time
and increasing safety. The PSNP in Ethiopia
prioritizes projects that produce community
assets that reduce women’s work burden
(Berhane et al., 2013). Examples include the
construction of community water points
and fuelwood sources, and the use of public
works labour to cultivate the land of labourconstrained female-headed households
(Holmes and Jones, 2013). Such prioritization

is having an impact: the construction of
water supply, sanitation and hygiene
facilities, for example, has reduced women’s
work burden (USAID, 2012).
Other countries have also prioritized
“women’s” community assets. Peru’s rural
roads project, aimed at remote indigenous
populations, has helped women improve
footpaths, facilitating their access to social
services and markets, and girls’ access
to schools (World Bank, 2009; Okola,
2011). Similarly, Zambia’s Food for Work
programme, almost entirely taken up by
women (as men typically refused to work for
non-cash payments), built pit latrines in rural
communities. The latrines have reduced
the distance that women have to walk and
thus their vulnerability to sexual violence
(Kabeer, 2008).
One of the main challenges facing asset
creation programmes is the issue of choice,
i.e. who chooses and how (see also the
section on “Strengthening women’s role
in enhancing human resources through
social protection” on pages 40–41). Women
and men tend to prioritize different
types of infrastructure. Even where both
sexes give priority to the same type of
asset, for example roads, there can be
critical differences in the types of road
they want. In Peru, for example, women
walk everywhere and thus wanted
footpaths, rather than roads suitable for
motor vehicles. Similarly, in India, where
the MGNREGA programme has been
criticized for emphasizing job creation over
infrastructure development (Mahaptra et al.,
2008), women beneficiaries have tended to
favour health care, child care and sanitation
projects. Nevertheless, as women have
limited access to decision-making, public
works projects have tended to give priority
to roads, water management and tree
planting.
However, public works programmes have
also come in for their share of criticism. For
example, many poor households are labourconstrained and therefore, depending on
the context, public works programmes may
not be the appropriate instrument to help
them. Moreover, the assets created by public
works programmes do not always meet basic
technical standards (Devereux and Guenther,
2009).

49

50

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Overall, social protection can have
substantial positive local economy
impacts
Most social protection beneficiaries live in
places where markets for financial services –
such as credit and insurance, labour, goods
and inputs – are lacking, difficult to access or
do not function well. Cash transfers, when
provided regularly and predictably, help
households overcome the obstacles that limit
their access to credit or cash (Tirivayi, Knowles
and Davis, 2013). This, in turn, can increase
spending on productive assets and other
income-generating activities, influence the
role of the beneficiaries in social networks,
increase market access and inject resources
into local economies.
When beneficiaries receive cash transfers,
the immediate impact is to raise the
purchasing power of beneficiary households.
They generally spend the cash, although
some of the transfers may increase savings. As
the cash is spent, the impact of the transfers
spreads from beneficiary households to others.
Income multipliers in programme villages are
set in motion by doorstep trade, purchases in
village stores and periodic markets.
The local income multiplier, which
measures the resulting changes in overall

local income per unit transferred (Taylor,
2013), has traditionally been estimated using
models such as social accounting matrices
or computable general equilibrium (CGE)
models. Using a CGE model combined with
micro-agricultural household models, Taylor,
Dyer and Yúnez-Naude (2005) estimated that
eliminating the PROGRESA/Oportunidades/
Prospera programme in West-Central Mexico
would reduce the incomes of landless
households by more than 7 percent, and for
households with small landholdings by more
than 4 percent. Eliminating the programme
would have minimal impact on commercial
maize production, but would reduce demand
and subsistence maize production by between
1.3 and 2.1 percent. Similarly, in Brazil,
an estimated 10 percent increase in Bolsa
Família transfers increased municipal GDP by
0.6 percent (Landim, 2009).
The Local Economy-wide Impact Evaluation
(LEWIE) model captures income multiplier
effects of social protection programmes
and other interventions by assessing the
impact on local economic activity (Taylor and
Filipski, 2012). The LEWIE methodology is
designed to fully assess and understand the
effects of cash transfers on local economies;
including on the production activities
of both beneficiary and non-beneficiary

FIGURE 13
The local income multiplier effect of social cash transfer programmes

Malawi (1)
Kenya (Nyanza) (2)
Ethiopia (Abi-Adi) (3)
Zimbabwe (4)
Zambia (5)
Kenya (Garissa) (2)
Lesotho (6)
Ghana (7)
Ethiopia (Hintalo) (3)
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

Local economy multiplier

Nominal multiplier

Real multiplier

Source: (1) Thome et al., 2015; (2) Taylor et al., 2013; (3) Kagin et al., 2014; (4) Taylor et al., 2014; (5) American Institutes for
Research, 2013; (6) Taylor, Thome, and Filipski, 2013; (7) Thorne et al., 2014.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

BOX 12
The impact of social protection programmes on prices
When a rise in income increases demand
for goods and services not accompanied
by increases in supply, much of the
additional income can be offset by price
rises. The strength of the supply response
is therefore important in determining the
impact on the local economy.
The effect of food aid on local prices
depends very much on the local context,
sometimes pushing prices up or down
(Barrett, 2002). In sub-Saharan Africa,
the size and duration of the programme,
the level and scale of benefits, and local
market conditions all influence how social
protection affects local prices. In northern
Uganda, for example, an emergency cash
transfer programme caused temporary local
price inflation (Creti, 2010). In the Niger, a
short-term cash transfer programme with
wide coverage and payments of significant
size produced temporary inflation in the
prices of edible oil and milk in a market
with high transaction costs and poor
market information (Save the Children,
2009). In Kenya, the HSNP (Merttens et al.,
2013) and in Zambia the Child Grant model
(American Institutes for Research, 2013)
were not inflationary.

groups, why these effects happen; and
how they may change when programmes
are scaled up to larger regions. All these
aspects are important for designing projects
and explaining their likely impacts to
governments and other partners.26
The LEWIE model has been used to estimate
local income multipliers for a number of
programmes and countries (Figure 13). The
estimates range from 1.25 in Malawi to 2.52
in Hintalo-Wajirat Tabias in Ethiopia. That
is, every Ethiopian birr transferred by the
Ethiopia Social Cash Transfer Pilot Programme
(SCTPP) in Hintalo-Wajirat, generates an

26
FAO’s From Protection to Production (PtoP) project
applied the LEWIE model to assess the impact of cash
transfer programmes in Africa. As a result, there now exists
a valuable body of evidence documenting the economywide impacts of cash transfers, their magnitude, their
pathways and the substantial benefits to non-beneficiaries.

In particular, large social protection
schemes can lead to short-term price
effects. For example, the cash transfer
component of the PSNP in Ethiopia was
followed by price rises in the short run
(Devereux et al., 2006), but this did not
persist and, eventually, prices in PSNP and
non-PSNP districts converged (Creti, 2010).
The PSNP and relief food aid did not have
an impact on grain prices, but some cash
transfers exerted upward pressure on prices,
especially for teff (Assefa Arega and Shively,
2014). Cash transfer programmes in six subSaharan African countries produced little
evidence of price effects (Barca et al., 2015).
The Programa de Apoyo Alimentario
(PAL) in Mexico, which included both
cash and in-kind transfers, had relatively
large price effects (Cunha, De Giorgi and
Jayachandran, 2011). In villages where
transfers were in cash, prices rose, while
in villages where transfers were in kind,
prices fell. There were no differences in
food prices between programme and
control communities due to the PROGRESA
(now Prospera) programme (Hoddinot and
Skoufias, 2004; Angelucci and De Giorgi,
2009).

additional 1.52 birr, for a total of 2.52 birr in
income generated in the local economy.
Differences among countries, and among
areas within countries, are determined by the
openness and structure of the local economy,
the degree to which goods and services
bought are locally produced, and the flexibility
of local supply. When the local supply response
is constrained, the increased demand, brought
about by the cash transfer programme, can
raise prices and consequently lower the
income multiplier in real terms (Box 12). In
each LEWIE study, the authors included in the
model a variety of constraints, such as credit
and capital constraints. In the presence of
supply constraints the real income multiplier
could be significantly lower than the nominal
multiplier, although still greater than one in all
cases (Figure 13).
For example Zambia’s Child Grant model
could potentially raise income by 1.79 kwacha

51

52

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

for every kwacha transferred; however, in the
presence of supply constraints and inflation,
the actual multiplier might only be 1.34
(American Institutes for Research, 2013). In
Ghana, supply-side constraints could reduce the
multiplier from 2.5 to 1.5 (Thorne et al., 2014).
An informative example is the Ethiopian
SCTPP, introduced in 2011. This programme
covers two woredas27 in the Tigray region, one
rural (Hintalo-Wajirat) and one urban (AbiAdi) (Kagin et al., 2014). Each birr distributed
in rural Hintalo-Wajirat generated an extra
1.52 birr in the local economy, for a total localincome multiplier of 2.52. By comparison, each
birr distributed in urban Abi-Adi generated
only an extra 0.35 birr, for a total localincome multiplier of 1.35. Thus, the initial
transfers of 5.58 million birr in Hintalo-Wajirat
and 1.62 million birr in Abi-Adi potentially
generated 14.06 million birr and 2.19 million
birr, respectively, of additional income in the
local economies. The difference in impact was
because, unlike Hintalo-Wajirat, Abi-Adi only
has a retail sector. The impact on the retail
sector is large, but many goods bought are
not locally produced, coming from outside
the area. The multiplier effects are therefore
spread more widely beyond the local economy
than in rural Hintalo-Wajirat.
In Hintalo-Wajirat, the non-beneficiaries,
who did not receive the transfer, benefited
indirectly from their economic interactions
with beneficiary households; virtually all the
spillover effects accrued to non-beneficiary
households, who could take advantage
of higher demand because they owned
productive assets. Supply-side constraints
lowered the multiplier effect to an estimated
1.84 for Hintalo-Wajirat (Kagin et al., 2014).
Agricultural and infrastructure interventions
that help relax supply constraints are therefore
an important complement to social protection
interventions.

•

•

•

•

•

•

Key messages
• Social protection can enhance nutrition,
health and education, with implications
for future productivity and employability.
• When social protection programmes are
regular and predictable they promote
27
A woreda is the third-level administrative division in
Ethiopia.

savings and investment in both farming
and non-farm activities and reduce the
risk households face, thus encouraging
them to engage in riskier activities
offering higher returns.
Social protection does not reduce work
effort. But it does give beneficiaries
greater choice, and many shift time
previously dedicated to casual agricultural
wage employment of last resort to
own-farm work or non-agricultural
employment. Some programmes have
facilitated female participation in the
labour force. Taken together with the
increase in farm and non-farm production
activities, social protection strengthens
livelihoods, instead of fostering
dependency.
Social protection programmes can
strengthen workers’ bargaining power.
In particular, public works/employment
programmes, can push up wages for
unskilled labour when large enough;
however, care must be taken in
programme design to avoid negative
impacts on agricultural production.
By increasing income and providing clear
messages, social protection programmes
tend to reduce child labour and increase
school attendance.
Social protection can strengthen social
networks such as informal savings
associations and reciprocity mechanisms
that serve as informal community
risk management mechanisms. These
networks facilitate spillover effects from
transfer beneficiaries to non-beneficiaries
and hence to the wider local economy.
Public works programmes can provide
important infrastructure and community
assets and, when designed and
implemented properly, directly contribute
to the local economy.
Social protection programmes have
substantial local-economy benefits by
stimulating demand for local goods and
services. Non-beneficiaries, especially,
stand to gain from this. Complementary
programmes that reduce local production
constraints, such as access to investment
credit or extension services, facilitate
the ability of local producers to respond
to increases in demand brought about
by social protection and help prevent
inflation.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

4. Understanding what works:
implications for programme
design and implementation
The evidence presented so far shows that
social assistance programmes can effectively
reduce poverty, improve food security and
nutrition, and promote savings, investment
and growth in the local economy. But not
all programmes are equally effective, and
their impacts can vary a great deal, both in
size and in nature. Because social protection
programmes are very diverse, comparing
their impacts is complicated. Even among
programmes that appear quite similar, such
as cash transfers for the poor, differences
in programme design and implementation
can lead to very different outcomes. In
this chapter, we review which design and
implementation features drive programme
impacts, keeping in mind that some impacts
are directly related to the objectives of the
programme, while others may be unintended
consequences.

Targeting may help achieve
programme objectives at lower
costs
Social protection programmes generally
have objectives that define the intended
beneficiaries. For example, in general,
when cash transfer programmes are meant
to reduce poverty, they should target the
poor. Further to this general objective, some
programmes, especially in sub-Saharan
Africa, have more specific objectives such as
supporting vulnerable groups, for example
orphaned children, HIV-affected populations,
the elderly or schoolchildren. How well
programmes can achieve their objectives will
depend, among other things, on how well
they reach their target group.
Not all programmes use a specific targeting
approach. For a number of reasons, such
as historical or political imperatives, ease
of implementation and commitments to

universal rights, some provide benefits to the
entire population. For example, in Egypt, until
recently food subsidies cost about 1–2 percent
of GDP, with around 60 percent of the cost
completely untargeted.28 The remainder
consisted of subsidized ration cards that
allowed 80 percent of Egyptian households
to buy rationed amounts of certain goods,
such as bread and sugar. The poor benefited
considerably from these subsidies, even
though some are untargeted. The elimination
of food subsidies in Egypt would raise the
poverty rate by nine percentage points,
from 25.2 to 34.0 percent (Breisinger et al.,
2013). Despite the food subsidy programme,
however, chronic malnutrition has been rising
since 2003: around one-third of all Egyptian
children are stunted, 35 percent of the
population have poor dietary diversity, while
48 percent of women over the age of 15 are
obese. Better-targeted subsidies could transfer
more resources to those in need and promote
greater dietary diversity.
The previous example shows that, given
limited government budgets, targeting can
deliver larger and better transfers to selected
individuals or households. Not surprisingly,
targeting is used in the majority of social
programmes in developing countries. The
most common methods used are outlined in
Box 13. Most social protection programmes
combine geographical targeting, proxy
means testing and community participation.
This is true for most conditional cash
transfer programmes in Latin America and
the Caribbean and most unconditional cash
transfer programmes in sub-Saharan Africa
(see Table 1).
Targeting entails administrative, political,
private, social and incentive costs (Coady,
28
We note that the Egyptian food subsidy system is
undergoing reform, including a move towards greater
targeting.

53

54

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

BOX 13
Targeting methods for social protection programmes
Geographical targeting. This method
entails targeting individuals or households
living in certain areas. The rationale for
using this method is based on differences
among areas, usually caused by the
unequal distribution of natural resources
and infrastructure, and differences in
agroclimatic conditions (Hentschel et al.,
2000). This method works when there is a
high and quite homogenous concentration
of poor and vulnerable groups in certain
areas, such as urban slums or remote rural
areas.
Community-based targeting. This method
of targeting selects eligible households
based on assessment of a selected group
of community members and leaders. This
mechanism is based on the assumption
that local members of the community
can identify individuals in need of social
programmes better than methods relying
on decisions made by others who do not
have experience of the mundane realities
of local communities. Community-based
targeting is an effective way of identifying
poor people when their status is not easily
identifiable by other methods.
Categorical targeting. This method involves
selecting individuals belonging to certain
categories of people such as orphaned
and vulnerable children, the elderly, the
disabled and female-headed households.
The characteristics of these categories are
more easily observed and monitored. The
advantages of categorical targeting include
relatively low administrative and political
costs, and the general social empathy for
the most vulnerable.

Grosh and Hoddinott, 2004). Administrative
costs are those related to data gathering
and analysis for targeting design and
implementation. Administrative targeting
costs are not easy to calculate because of
the lack of reliable data, but also because
targeting is a continuous process. After initial
identification of eligible groups, constant
monitoring for possible fraud or changes

Self-targeting. This method is based on
voluntary self-selection for programmes
designed so that only poor people will
apply for the benefits. One example of selftargeting is public works programmes, which
offer low wages expected to incentivize only
poor people to apply. The administrative
costs associated with self-targeting are low,
even if other challenges arise.
Means testing. A test that determines
selection based on individuals/households
meeting some objective criteria such as
income levels. When data on income
are verifiable, and there is good
administrative capacity, means testing
can be an accurate method of targeting.
In many developing countries, data are
lacking, and administrative capacity may
be weak, making means testing difficult to
implement.
Proxy means testing. In the absence of
reliable data on income, a proxy means
test is sometimes used. This method
consists of using observable characteristics
as proxies for a given measure of wellbeing, such as income. Examples of
observable characteristics for proxy means
testing have usually included demographic
characteristics, the education level of
household members, the quality of
housing, durable goods possessed and
productive assets owned (AusAID, 2011;
Slater and Farrington, 2009).
Note: For additional detail, particularly on the pros
and cons of each method, see Coady, Grosh and
Hoddinott (2004) and Cirillo, Gyori and Soares (2014).
Source: Cirillo, Giory and Soares, 2014.

in households’ social and economic status is
needed, even if frequent retargeting is not
desirable because of the uncertainty caused,
which could, in turn, affect beneficiaries’
risk-taking decisions (Farrington, Sharp
and Sjoblom, 2007). Lastly, some targeting
methods involve high administrative costs,
which also need to be taken into consideration
(Coady, Grosh and Hoddinott, 2004).

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

Targeting also involves political costs.
While universal programmes may generate
broad or popular support, targeting a given
group may reduce political support for, and
hence the sustainability of, a programme.
Targeting can also be manipulated to benefit
politically favoured groups. The relative sizes

55

of beneficiary and non-beneficiary groups
could eventually play a role in political
elections or further political decision-making
about targeting.
Social programme beneficiaries can
also incur costs, for example those directly
related to eligibility such as (re)certification

TABLE 1
Targeting methods employed by selected social assistance programmes
Means
testing

Proxy
means
testing

Geographical
targeting

Communitybased
targeting*

Categorical
targeting

X

X

Self-targeting

East Asia and the Pacific
China: Di Bao

X

Indonesia: Program Keluarga Harapan

X

Philippines: Pantawid Pamilya

X

X

X

Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil: Bolsa Família

X

Chile: Solidario

X

Ecuador: Bono de Desarrollo Humano

X

El Salvador: Comunidades Solidarias Rurales
(formerly Red Solidaria)

X
X

X

Mexico: PROGRESA/Oportunidades/Prospera**

X

X

Peru: Juntos***

X

X

X

X

X

South Asia
Bangladesh: Food for Education
India: Indira Gandhi National Old-Age Pension
Scheme

X

X
X

India: Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)

X

Sub-Saharan Africa
Ethiopia: Productive Safety Net Programme
(PSNP)

X

X

Ethiopia: Social Cash Transfer Pilot Programme
(SCTPP)

X

X

X

Ghana: Livelihood Empowerment Against
Poverty (LEAP)

X

X

X

Kenya: Cash Transfer for Orphans and
Vulnerable Children (CT-OVC)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Kenya: Hunger Safety Net Programme (HSNP)
Lesotho: Child Grants Programme (CGP)

X

Malawi: Social Cash Transfer Scheme (SCT)

X
X

Mozambique: Programa Subsídio de Alimentos
(PSA)
South Africa: Child Grant Programme
Zambia: Multiple Category Cash Transfer (MCP)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

Notes:
*In general, community-based targeting in the Latin America and the Caribbean region is used to validate the list of beneficiaries determined
by other targeting instruments such as means testing or proxy means testing. This is in contrast to sub-Saharan Africa, where community-based
targeting is a key component of most programmes.
**In rural areas, community-based targeting was used for ex-post community validation of beneficiaries as determined by proxy means testing.
In urban areas, no community-based targeting was used, but the programme employed self-targeting, i.e. households that considered themselves
eligible have to apply.
***In Peru, community-based targeting was used for ex-post community validation of the list of beneficiaries determined by proxy means testing.
Source: Cirillo, Gyori and Soares, 2014.

56

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

(e.g. paying fees for documents required
for participation in a programme) and the
opportunity costs of the hours of work
foregone to apply. Such costs could affect
beneficiaries’ decisions to participate.
Households could develop an incentive to
not remain eligible for a programme (e.g.
the disincentive to offer their labour with the
availability of unemployment subsidies) or
may change their behaviour positively (e.g. by
enrolling their children in school because of
the enforcement of conditionality).
Social costs could involve, for example,
social stigma experienced by households
eligible for programmes targeted at poor
and/or vulnerable categories of individuals
(e.g. people with disabilities or living with
HIV/AIDS), or community divisions between
beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries. When
community members are involved in selecting
beneficiaries, negative repercussions could
be worse. In an extreme example, in one
Ethiopian woreda, the grain store of a
member of the food security task force was
burned down by former beneficiaries of the
PSNP after they had been excluded from it
(Devereux et al., 2008).
Evaluating the performance of targeting is
crucial to determine whether the targeting
mechanism supports its objectives costeffectively. Several tools exist for assessing
the efficacy of targeting mechanisms.29
One frequently used measure involves the
analysis of leakage (inclusion error) and
undercoverage (exclusion error). An inclusion
error occurs when individuals not eligible for
the programme are included as beneficiaries,
while an exclusion error occurs when eligible
individuals are excluded by the programme.
Errors may arise during the design phase as
well as the implementation phase (SabatesWheeler, Hurrell and Devereux, 2014). During
the design phase, errors arise for two main
reasons: budget constraints that compel
governments to set a quota of beneficiaries
(this implies planned undercoverage rather
than an actual error),30 and selected measures

for identifying poor people. Implementation
errors can arise because of misrepresentation
of the beneficiary’s economic or social
status, the lack of required documents from
the potential beneficiaries and inefficient
implementation of targeting. Administrative
capacity is also important: in Brazil,
municipalities with higher management levels
had higher Bolsa Família coverage (Portela
Souza et al., 2013).
Another popular measure of targeting
performance, the CGH index, developed by
and named after Coady, Grosh and Hoddinott
(2004), compares the actual targeting
outcome of an intervention with a common
reference outcome such as that obtained
due to random or universal allocation of
benefits. The index is constructed by dividing
the share of benefits accruing to the poorest
percentiles, by the share of the population
belonging to these percentiles. The CGH index
was applied to 122 social programmes in 48
countries for the largest targeting analysis of
programmes conducted so far. The authors
found that the median programme was able
to transfer 25 percent more resources to the
poor compared with a hypothetical random
allocation. They also found that certain
methods, such as means testing and proxy
means testing, performed better on average,
but noted that better scoring methods also
had higher variation in scores. They concluded
that no single targeting method is universally
superior, and that the same method may
perform differently, depending on the
programme and country.
In practice, using a combination of targeting
methods produces better results, but effective
implementation is key and depends on
implementation capacity, accountability and
the degree of inequality, as greater inequality
makes it easier to identify the poor and
vulnerable, with targeting outcomes generally
better (Coady, Grosh and Hoddinott, 2004).
While the preferred targeting methods
depend on the factors mentioned above,
certain tools are associated with improved
targeting. For example, Brazil’s Bolsa Família
is one of the best targeted programmes in
29
For an in-depth discussion of the pros and cons of these
Latin America; due to the use of a unified
tools, see Cirillo, Gyori and Soares (2014).
30
household registry (CadÚnico) (Box 14)
In Brazil, on the other hand, targeting for Bolsa Família
followed a more inclusive approach in order not to exclude
(Lindert et al., 2007). Established in 2001,
needy families from the programme. As a result, in 2010, the
this registry is used for all interventions
inclusion error for this programme was greater than the exclusion
except the Social Security Programme, and
error, with the former mainly due to the inclusion of families
covers over 23 million families (Del Grossi
just above the poverty line (Cirillo, Gyori and Soares, 2014).

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

and Marques, 2015; World Bank, 2014). The
greater efficiency and cost reduction achieved
by using a unified household registry has
attracted much interest from other countries,
and about 23 countries now have a social
registry, or are developing one, with another
ten countries planning to establish one (World
Bank, 2014).
Unified registries allow countries to combine
programmes more effectively. In Brazil, the
CadÚnico combines ten different programmes.
In Peru, Juntos, a rural conditional cash
transfer programme, selects its beneficiaries
using data provided by the unified household
registry (Padrón General de Hogares) and the
targeting system Sistema de Focalización de
Hogares. The same data and targeting system
are also used for other social programmes,
such as the nutrition programmes, Vaso
de Leche, Comedores Populares, Programa
Integral de Nutrición, as well as the free health
insurance scheme, Seguro Integral de Salud. In
addition, unified registries allow governments
to develop synergies between policy areas
such as social protection and agriculture, an
issue we return to in Chapter 5.
The use of targeting indicators is an
instrument for reducing poverty. Yet, better
targeting will always come at a cost, which
implies that fewer resources will be available
for distribution to the population. A welltargeted programme might therefore have
a lower poverty impact than a programme
with a poorer targeting. As a consequence,
evaluations should always focus on a
programme’s poverty impact, not on its
targeting performance per se (Ravallion, 2009).

Level, timing and predictability
of transfers matter
Social assistance reduces poverty and hunger,
and has an impact on production if transfers
are able to remove cash and credit constraints,
improving households’ ability to manage risks.
Programmes that do so effectively are those
that not only transfer adequate amounts,
but are also able to implement transfers on
a regular and reliable basis (IEG, 2011; Barca
et al., 2015; Tirivayi, Knowles and Davis, 2013;
Daidone et al., 2015).
In Bangladesh, for example, the RMP and
the FFA programme had larger impacts on
women’s empowerment and well-being
because they transferred larger amounts
(almost twice as much) compared with the
IGVGD and FSVGD programmes (Ahmed,
Quisumbing et al., 2009) (also see Chapters
2 and 3 for more on these programmes).
Similarly, the Malawi SCT had a large
impact because the transfers, averaging
about 30 percent of beneficiary household
expenditure (before the transfer), were
relatively large (Boone et al., 2013). On the
other hand, transfers from Lesotho’s CGP
were mainly used for food purchases and
children’s education, and had little impact on
livelihood strategies due to the small size of
the transfers (Pellerano et al., 2014). Evidence
from Ethiopia shows that programme length
is also important: the PSNP led to significant
improvements in food security for those
who had participated in the programme for
five years compared with one year (Berhane
et al., 2011).

BOX 14
Cadastro Único
Created in 2001, the Cadastro Único
(CadÚnico) is the main registry of Brazil’s
most poor and vulnerable. It is used by the
Bolsa Família programme and the Brasil
Sem Misera plan (Brazil without Extreme
Poverty Plan) to reach about 14 million
families each month (World Bank, 2015d).
It consolidates different cash transfer
programmes and reduces the burden of
data collection (Mostafa and Sátyro, 2014).
The unified registry is operated by Caixa, a
national public bank, which has experience

with large databases and the capacity to
make timely monthly transfers.
The new database, which targets
beneficiaries using unverified means
testing (screening unverified household
incomes), aligns each member with a
social identification number, significantly
reducing administrative costs (de la
Brière and Lindert, 2005). The registry has
become a national reference containing
comprehensive data on the poor and
needy.

57

58

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

There is a great deal of variation among
programmes in the value of transfers as
shares of beneficiary households’ per capita
consumption. Estimates based on ASPIRE
(the World Bank’s Atlas of Social Protection
Indicators of Resilience and Equity) data
show that, when expressed as a percentage
of the income/consumption of beneficiaries,
transfers vary from 53 percent in Eastern
Europe and Central Asia, to 27 percent in
Latin America, to under 10 percent in subSaharan Africa and developing Asia (Fiszbein,
Kanbur and Yemtsov, 2013). In Latin America,
the transfers, especially of the larger
programmes, appear to have been calibrated
to cover the average “poverty gap”.
However, Barrientos and Hinojosa-Valencia
(2009) conclude that the transfers focus on
supporting schooling and access to health
care, rather than on closing the poverty gap.
In sub-Saharan Africa, programmes
typically relate the transfer amount to some
stated programme objective. For example,
Zambia’s Child Grant model aimed to provide
at least one meal per person daily in the
household, with the amount set accordingly.
Other programmes focus on eliminating the

poverty gap, closing the food poverty gap, or
providing a percentage of the food poverty
line income. Since most national programmes
in sub-Saharan Africa have food security as
a key objective, the food poverty line or cost
of a typical meal is the most common point
of reference used to set the transfer amount
(Davis and Handa, 2015). For 13 programmes
in sub-Saharan Africa, transfer levels have
been between 10 and 32 percent of the per
capita income of the poor, with 8 in the
15–28 percent range (Figure 14). In Zambia,
the relative value of the Child Grant model
transfer reached almost 30 percent of per
capita income, compared with less than
10 percent for Ghana’s LEAP programme in
its early days (Figure 14). Programmes that
provide larger transfers have greater impact,
and the crucial threshold appears to be
around 20 percent of per capita income.
For countries using a flat rate, per capita
value then varies with household size.
While the Kenyan transfer represented
14 percent of per capita consumption for
average sized households, the share ranged
from 10 percent for large households to
22 percent for small households (Daidone et

FIGURE 14
Transfer amount as a share of beneficiary household income
Limited impact

Widespread impact

Kenya CT-OVC (large hh)
Burkina Faso
Ghana LEAP
Kenya CT-OVC
Malawi SCT
South Africa CSG
Lesotho CGP
Ghana LEAP
Kenya CT-OVC (small hh)
Zimbabwe HSCT
Zambia CGP
Zambia MCP
Malawi SCT
0

10

20

30

40

Percentage
Notes: Twenty percent marks a crucial threshold: programmes that transfer significantly less than this threshold have small
and selective impacts on households, while those that transfer significantly more than this threshold show widespread impacts.
hh = households.
Source: Davis and Knowles, 2015.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

al., 2015). Kenyan (CT-OVC and HSNP) and
Zambian (Child Grant model) transfers are
not adjusted for the number of children per
household; as a consequence, impacts were
stronger for smaller households. Transfer
values may also decline over time if not
adjusted for inflation: in Kenya (CT-OVC),
the real value of the transfer fell by almost
60 percent because of inflation between
2007 and 2011.
Most social assistance transfers are
designed to cover a minimum basket of food
consumption, and if additional impacts are
sought transfer levels should be increased
accordingly. The available data show a wide
range of transfer levels, but in many of the
poorest countries transfers are well below
what it would take to close the gap (Fiszbein,
Kanbur and Yemtsov, 2014).
Perhaps just as important is the timing
and predictability of transfers. Beneficiary
households will spend irregular lump
sum transfers differently than they would
regular and predictable transfers. Late
and unreliable payments undermined the
positive impacts of a number of cash transfer
programmes in sub-Saharan Africa (Barca et
al., 2015; Daidone et al., 2015). If transfers
are not regular and reliable, it is difficult
for households to plan and smoothen
consumption over time, and thus sustainably
change the quantity and quality of diets.
This likely contributed to the lack of impact
of cash transfer programmes in Ghana and
Lesotho (Handa et al., 2013; Pellerano et al.,
2014). Lumpy payments will be either saved
or spent on purchases of more expensive
items (Haushofer and Shapiro, 2013; Handa
et al., 2013). Moreover, regularity and
reliability increase the time horizon of
beneficiary households, allowing households
to manage risks and shocks more effectively
and thus avoid “negative” coping strategies
such as distress sales of livestock and
withdrawing children from school. At the
same time, households can avoid risk-averse
production strategies and, instead, increase
risk-taking in more profitable crops and/
or activities. Regular and reliable payments
increase confidence, creditworthiness and
ability to plan, while reducing pressure
on informal insurance mechanisms. They
also help households participate in social
networks (Barca et al., 2015).

Household-level factors influence
programme impacts
Targeting criteria have strong implications for
the demographic characteristics – such as adults
of working age – of beneficiary households
across programmes. These, in turn, explain
some differences in impact across programmes
(Winters and Davis, 2009; Daidone et al.,
2015). For example, Ghana’s LEAP programme
targets the vulnerable as well as the poor, and
beneficiary households include a relatively
high proportion of elderly people and older
children, but relatively few adults of working
age. Kenya’s CT-OVC and Lesotho’s CGP focus
on child poverty, and beneficiary households
often include orphans and vulnerable children.
Zambia’s Child Grant model, on the other
hand, targets households with children aged
0–5 years who live in households with relatively
young children, and so contain relatively more
adults of working age.
These demographic differences are
also reflected in household-level impacts.
Households with more available labour,
for example, are in a better position to
take advantage of the cash for productive
investments, in both the short and longer run.
The higher transfers in Zambia than in the
other three programmes help explain why
labour supply and allocation responses are
much more pronounced in Zambia than for
the other programmes (Table 2). Furthermore,
beneficiaries in Zambia had much stronger
responses in terms of investment in
agricultural inputs, tools, livestock ownership
and non-farm enterprises (Daidone et al.,
2015). Other factors, discussed below, also play
a role, and it is impossible to clearly identify
the impact of each factor. Hence, Table 2 is
only indicative.
Access to assets and resources besides labour
also facilitates the productive use of cash
transfers. Households with access to more
land, tools and/or education seem to be in a
better position to use the cash for productive
purposes, and hence likely to make more
progress. In general, cash transfers are more
effective in generating a production response
when the main constraint is working capital
rather than land availability. When land is
scarce, basic needs are often the main priority,
and investment in agricultural inputs is often
not feasible (Barca et al., 2015).

59

60

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Table 2
Programme impacts across households
Country/Programme
Zambia CG

Kenya CT-OVC

Lesotho CGP

Ghana LEAP

↓↓

↓

↓↓

—

↑

—

↓↓

—

Family farming employment

↑↑

↑

↑

↑

Non-farm business employment

↑↑

Household labour impacts
Agricultural wage employment
Non-agricultural wage employment

—

Household production impacts
Agricultural inputs

↑↑

Agricultural tools
Agricultural production

↓

↑↑

↑

↑↑

—

—

—

↑

—

↑

—

Home production of food

—

↑

Livestock ownership

↑↑

↑

↑

—
—

Non-farm enterprises

↑↑

↑

—

—

Notes: ↑↑ = positive and significant for many indicators; ↑ = positive and significant for one or a few indicators or for
specific subgroups; — = not significant; ↓ = negative and significant for one or a few indicators or for specific subgroups;
↓↓ = negative and significant for many indicators; blank cells indicate absence of indicators.
CG = Child grant model.
Source: Daidone et al., 2015.

Impacts are gender-differentiated
Impact differences are also due to women
and men using transfers differently.31 First,
many social protection programmes target
women because a substantial body of research
shows that giving women greater control over
household spending raises expenditures on
food, health, education, children’s clothing
and nutrition, and improves human resources
(Holmes et al., 2014; FAO, 2011; Yoong,
Rabinovich and Diepeveen, 2012). Impacts can
also vary with the gender of children (Yoong,
Rabinovich and Diepeveen, 2012; Duflo, 2003).
In addition, many studies show that transfer
programmes also have unexpected impacts
that vary with gender. For example, men and
women may not invest in the same type of
livestock: women generally seem to prefer
small livestock, such as goats, sheep, pigs and
poultry, while men prefer larger livestock,
such as cattle, horses and camels (Martínez,
2004; FAO, 2009; Tirivayi, Knowles and Davis,
2013). Such differences are then reflected in
how assets are used in response to shocks. For
example, in Bangladesh, women’s assets were
disposed of more quickly to respond to family
31
Tirivayi, Knowles and Davis (2013) conclude that gender
is the most common source of variation in impact findings.

illnesses, whereas men’s assets were typically
used to cover marriage expenses and dowries
(Quisumbing, Kumar and Behrman, 2011).
Malawi’s SCT had a bigger impact on livestock
ownership among female-headed households,
as these households started with much less
(Covarrubias, Davis and Winters, 2012). In all
regions, women in general owned significantly
fewer animals than men (FAO, 2009).
Finally, labour supply decisions can differ
with gender. For example, in Kenya’s CT-OVC
programme, transfers made it easier for
women to participate in the labour force,
especially for those who lived further away
(Asfaw et al., 2014). Given women’s role in
care-giving and food preparation, additional
incomes may also lead to women shifting
labour to domestic care and work, rather than
work outside the household.

Programme design matters
Different programmes also achieve different
impacts because they involve different
instruments. For example, conditional
programmes have stronger impacts on
behaviour compared with unconditional
programmes. In Bangladesh, the RMP
generates the highest savings rate (compared

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

with the FFA, IGVGD and FSGVD programmes)
because increased saving is a condition of the
programme (Ahmed, Quisumbing et al., 2009).
In Burkina Faso, schemes requiring parents
to ensure that their children under the age
of five participate in quarterly child-growth
monitoring at local health clinics found
that conditional cash transfers significantly
increased the number of preventive health
care visits, while unconditional cash transfers
did not have such an impact (Akresh, de
Walque and Kazianga, 2012).
However, evidence from unconditional
programmes in sub-Saharan Africa indicates
that, at least with regard to schooling, the
impacts achieved compared favourably
with those from conditional cash transfer
programmes around the world (Kenya CT-OVC
Evaluation Team, 2012; Baird et al., 2013).
In many sub-Saharan African programmes,
messaging partially replaces explicit
conditions, and has also been found to have
a strong impact (see Box 6, p. 27). Conditions
involving health and education are not helpful
when health clinics or schools are difficult
to reach or not available (Grosh et al., 2008;
Handa and Davis, 2006).

Markets matter too
The nature of the local economy also shapes
the type and extent of the productive impacts
of cash transfer programmes. In rural areas,
market constraints can be particularly binding
due to low population density, low levels
of public investment and inadequate public
infrastructure.
Where markets are more developed,
the effects of cash transfers on livelihood
strategies tend to be stronger (Barca et al.,
2015). The importance of market conditions
has generally been framed in relation to
the availability of factors of production. For
example, household agricultural economic
investment in Kenya was more prevalent
in the Owendo district compared with
the Kangundo district, due to the wider
availability of land, livestock and labour, and
the prevalence of sugar-cane cash cropping.
In Kangundo, where economic opportunities
within the agricultural economy were more
constrained, cash transfers were primarily
used as a safety net mechanism. In Ghana and
Kenya, the ability to hire-in labour to work on

farms is a crucial enabler for beneficiaries to
engage in new types of economic activities.
And in Malawi, cash transfer beneficiaries
in areas better connected to markets often
invested in small businesses, while those in
remote areas did not (OPM, 2014).
At the same time, social protection
programmes have an impact on local markets.
This effect is more pronounced around
payment days, but the transfers are not
usually large enough to create new markets
(Barca et al., 2015). The impacts may depend
on the size of the beneficiary community
relative to the size of the market.

Key messages
• Accurate targeting is a critical
determinant of the effectiveness of
social transfers in achieving their
objectives. But the costs of targeting
must be weighed against the amounts
transferred. Each targeting method has
costs and benefits, and no single method
is universally preferred. Implementation
is key, regardless of method. Most
programmes choose multiple methods to
combine the strengths of each individual
method.
• The level, timing and predictability of
income transfers are central to success.
The size of the transfer must be large
enough to enable beneficiaries to increase
consumption in line with programme
objectives and spending on other
necessities. Furthermore, to effectively
address credit and liquidity constraints,
and to help households manage risk,
transfers must be regular and reliable.
• Household characteristics, particularly
labour availability and the gender of the
recipient, influence programme impacts.
Gender dynamics influence both how
income transfers are spent or invested and
how assets and resources are managed.
• When to use conditionalities or
simple messaging in programme
design depends on the local context,
but both are effective in influencing
beneficiary behaviour. In some contexts,
unconditional programmes, with
or without messaging, have similar
impacts on beneficiary behaviour as do
conditional programmes.

61

62

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

5. Social protection and
agricultural development
Evidence presented in the previous chapters
makes a strong case for providing social
protection measures, particularly income
transfers, to rural households, who comprise
the vast majority of the world’s poor and
rely on agriculture for substantial parts of
their incomes. While recipients of social
protection transfers can become more
productive, their purchases of food and
other local goods and services can also
stimulate the local economy more broadly.
But social protection, as essential as it is for
the poor and vulnerable, will not transform
local economies by itself: it can only play a
supporting role. Social protection cannot
address all the structural constraints as well
as market and infrastructural weaknesses
that rural farm households face. To address
poverty and food insecurity in the context
of rural development and agricultural
transformation, both social protection and
agricultural policies and interventions are
needed.
This chapter explores a continuum of
options to bring together and better
coordinate social protection and agricultural
interventions. The options range from standalone, sector-specific, social protection or
agricultural programmes, which, by virtue of
their design, reflect bringing together the
two in integrated interventions that combine
both social protection and agriculture, to
sectoral interventions that are aligned in
order to maximize complementarities and
reduce contradictions (Gavrilovic et al.,
2015). These categorizations are flexible,
with approaches combined or sequenced in a
variety of ways.
Single, sector-specific, stand-alone
programmes can bring together social
protection and agriculture. Social protection
interventions can be designed to enhance the
agricultural livelihoods of its beneficiaries.
Kenya’s HSNP, for instance, allows
beneficiaries to collect their cash transfer
when and where they want, in order to

accommodate their semi-nomadic pastoralist
livelihoods. As discussed in Chapter 4, even
altering the design and implementation of
social protection interventions, such as the
size, timing and regularity of cash transfers,
can strengthen their impacts on agriculture.
From the perspective of agriculture, input
subsidies can be designed to reach vulnerable
small family farmers to facilitate their access
to farm inputs.
Social protection and agriculture can be
linked together in joint programmes, where
both types of intervention are brought to
bear on specific target populations. Social
protection programmes can be bundled with
complementary agricultural packages, as in
the case of the public works PSNP and OFSP/
HABP in Ethiopia, or by linking Lesotho’s
CGP cash transfers with home garden
programmes. Social protection programmes
can also be combined with financial
inclusion measures to assist households in
building savings and assets, as in the case
of Rwanda’s VUP. Social protection and
agriculture can also be joined together in
integrated programmes, such as Bangladesh’s
BRAC graduation model, which combines a
package of one-time productive assets, cash
or food support, savings, training, health
care and social integration. Interventions can
also be sequenced or layered; as households
gradually improve their well-being, they can
receive a broader menu of complementary
agricultural interventions to assist farmers in
expanding their agricultural production and
income generation.
Better alignment of programmes can also
exploit synergies between social protection
and agricultural development. Since linkages
between agriculture and social protection
occur at different levels (i.e. household and
local community/regional economy), there
are significant opportunities to exploit
interactions among instruments, even
when they are not delivered in the same
locations or target the same beneficiaries.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

For instance, agricultural interventions, such
as institutional procurement programmes
(IPPs), can be directed at small family
farmers with production potential in the
same geographical areas in which social
protection programmes such as school
feeding, are being implemented. Where
individual programmes exist, the challenge
is to improve their harmonization and
coverage. For example, a well-coordinated
range of social protection and agricultural
interventions can be aligned to cater for
distinct groups of the poor.
The remaining part of this chapter focuses
in more detail on a number of the more
common approaches, issues and evidence
relevant to obtain coherence between social
protection and agriculture. This includes a
review of a number of examples of joint
programmes, a discussion of two major
agricultural policies (input subsidies and
credit) and issues related to improving their
coherence with social protection, and a
review of IPPs. The final section discusses
one of the main operational issues faced in
obtaining better coherence between social
protection and agriculture, namely targeting.

Combining interventions into joint
programmes
A growing body of evidence on the impacts
of joint programmes confirms the benefits
of combining interventions. In Ethiopia,
households that benefited from PSNP
transfers alone did not purchase agricultural
inputs and only undertook limited
agricultural investments (Hoddinott et al.,
2012). However, households with access to
both the PSNP as well as complementary
packages of agricultural support (OFSP/HABP)
were more likely to be food-secure, borrow
for productive purposes, use improved
agricultural technologies and operate their
own non-farm business activities (Gilligan,
Hoddinott and Taffesse, 2008; Berhane et
al., 2014). This complementarity can go both
ways, as attempts to improve yields through
the OFSP/HABP were sometimes more
effective when coupled with PSNP transfers
(Hoddinott et al., 2012).
Comparison of four social assistance
programmes in Bangladesh (IGVGD, FSGVD,
FFA and RMP, see also Chapters 2 and 3)

showed that complementary interventions,
in addition to food and cash transfers, had
positive impacts. For example, the IGVGD
had a built-in provision for microcredit
that had a large impact, relative to other
programmes, on livestock and poultry
assets. All four programmes also provided
training in income-generating activities,
life skills, basic literacy and numeracy, and
increasing awareness of social, legal, health
and nutrition issues. Training in incomegenerating activities has been quite effective,
as the majority of programme participants
reported subsequently starting such activities
(Ahmed, Quisumbing et al., 2009).
In Bangladesh, BRAC’s CFPR-TUP
programme is another example of multiple
interventions involving a social protection
programme that ultimately aims to
graduate the poorest out of poverty and to
increase their participation in microcredit
programmes. First- and second-phase impact
evaluations of the programme found
increased agricultural asset ownership, selfemployment, savings, access to land, food
security, income and poverty reduction
(Rabbani, Prakash and Sulaiman, 2006; Das
and Shams, 2011). The impact of individual
CPFR-TUP interventions are difficult to
isolate, but available evidence indicates
that programmes that are multifaceted –
i.e. integrate a number of interventions,
including conditional or unconditional
cash transfers, asset grants for income
generation, skills training, community
investments, social development and local
elite mobilization, and health and nutrition
support – can effectively promote the
more ambitious objective of sustainably
improving welfare (Ahmed, Rabbani et al.,
2009; Sabates-Wheeler and Devereux, 2014).32
Important factors in the programme’s success
were the initial subsistence allowance
(to mitigate the fact that assets do not
immediately generate incomes), linking asset

32
About 92 percent of participants in BRAC’s CFPR-TUP
were able to emerge from, and stay out of, ultra-poverty
(Pahlowan and Samaranyake, 2014). Programmes modelled
on the programme were piloted in several countries
by the Ford Foundation and the Consultative Group to
Assist the Poor (CGAP). Subsequent evaluation of these
programmes in Ethiopia, Ghana, Honduras, India, Pakistan
and Peru found that they substantially improved the food
consumption of the poor, even a year after the programme
had ended (Banerjee et al., 2015).

63

64

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

transfers to selected income-generating
enterprises, and skills training (SabatesWheeler and Devereux, 2011).
In Peru, beneficiaries of the social cash
transfer programme Juntos also received
support from the rural development
programme Haku Wiñay, aimed at
strengthening the productive and incomegenerating capacities of extremely poor
farmers through complementary support
aimed at improving production systems,
improving sanitary conditions, supporting
rural businesses and providing financial
education. To encourage households to
adopt simple and low-cost technologies
such as sprinkler irrigation systems, outdoor
in-field horticulture, plots with cultivated
mixed pastures, agroforestry, production
of organic fertilizers, and guinea pig
and hen breeding, Haku Wiñay provides
Juntos beneficiaries with productive
assets, technical assistance and training.33
Preliminary findings from an impact
evaluation show that, after two years,
income sources related to crop and livestock
production and agricultural processing grew
faster for beneficiary than non-beneficiary
households (Escobal and Ponce, 2015).

Complementary interventions are
essential to address malnutrition
effectively
The immediate causes of better
nutrition outcomes are complex and
multidimensional. They include the adequate
availability of and access to safe, diverse,
nutritious food; access to clean water,
sanitation and health care; and appropriate
child-feeding and adult dietary choices. The
root causes of better nutrition outcomes
are even more complex and encompass the
broader economic, social, political, cultural
and physical environment. Social assistance
is an important instrument for improving
nutrition outcomes among the poor but it
cannot sustainably eliminate poverty and
malnutrition by itself: additional, integrated
action and complementary interventions are
needed in agriculture and the food system
in general, in public health and education,

33

Haku Wiñay is not exclusive to Juntos beneficiaries.

as well as in broader policy domains (Box 15)
(OPM, 2013a).
Increasing micronutrient availability is
a particular challenge. Small-scale homegardening projects to boost household
fruit and vegetable consumption represent
one approach suitable for poor households
that can accompany social assistance
programmes. Home gardening is already
widely practised, can be effective on a
small scale and is feasible in most locations,
although water and labour constraints may
pose challenges and should be carefully
considered in project design (FAO, 2013a).
One home production intervention that
was successfully scaled up is the Homestead
Food Production project, introduced in
Bangladesh by Helen Keller International
nearly two decades ago. Initially focused
on promoting home gardens to improve
micronutrient intake, the project’s scope
subsequently widened to also include small
animal husbandry and nutrition education
(Iannotti, Cunningham and Ruel, 2009). In
Lesotho, a pilot kitchen garden intervention
was combined with the government’s CGP
cash transfer programme. The combination
of the two interventions led to greater foodsecurity impacts, for labour-constrained
households, than the keyhole garden by
itself (Dewbre et al., 2015).34
In some communities, micronutrient
intakes can be more effectively enhanced by
strengthening animal husbandry. In Ethiopia,
for example, the FARM-Africa Dairy Goat
Development Project built on the important
role of goats in mixed-farming systems of
some communities, and was successful in
raising the nutritional status and family
welfare of project participants (Ayele and
Peacock, 2003). Also in Ethiopia, the Milk
Matters project, by Save the Children,
enhanced animal husbandry and livestock
production among pastoralists while
improving the nutritional status of children
(Sadler et al., 2012).
Sumberg and Lankoandé (2013) reviewed
several “heifer-in-trust” (also referred to as

34
The basic keyhole garden is a small (about 1 metre high
and 2 metres in diameter), circular, raised bed made up of
layers of soil, ash, manure and other organic material. The
raised structure also makes access easier for the chronically
ill or elderly.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

BOX 15
Designing nutrition-enhancing social protection policies and programmes
The Second International Conference on
Nutrition (ICN2), organized jointly by the
FAO and WHO, identified social protection
as a key sector for improving nutrition. The
outcome documents of the Conference –
the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and its
companion Framework for Action – urge
governments and policy-makers to explore
complementarities between nutrition
and social protection to effectively tackle
malnutrition in all its forms.
Research leading to ICN2 concluded
that the wide reach and focus of social
protection programmes should be
used to improve nutrition outcomes
(Alderman and Mustafa, 2013). However,
implementing these programmes can be
challenging, as nutrition is often only
one of many development objectives
that social protection seeks to address.
Evidence gathered thus far points to a

“livestock-in-kind credit”) projects.35 They
concluded that, although the term social
protection is not used in these projects,
the objectives of asset building, improved
nutrition and increased income as well
as the stated target groups, have strong
affinities with social-protection programmes.
However, they cautioned that the project
outcomes depend on a wide array of
circumstances, and the poorest are also least
likely to be able to handle the demands
and risks associated with livestock assets.
A recent evaluation of the impact of Heifer
International’s dairy cow and meat goat
donation programme in Rwanda found that
it substantially increased dairy and meat
consumption among Rwandan households

35
“Heifer-in-trust” projects aim primarily to build up the
productive asset base of poor people. These projects are
typically rotating, in-kind loan schemes based on in-kind
repayment. A project will transfer one or more female
animals to beneficiaries on the understanding that, over
time, a specified number of female offspring will be returned
to the project so that they can be passed on to other
beneficiaries. Until the repayments are complete, the original
animals are “owned” by the project “in trust” for the
beneficiaries, but after repayment, they become the property
of the beneficiaries (Sumberg and Lankoandé, 2013).

few operational requisites that can be
adopted to maximize the impact of social
protection policies and programmes on
nutrition.
Incorporating explicit nutrition
objectives and indicators in the monitoring
and evaluation systems of social protection
programmes can greatly enhance
their nutrition sensitivity. Targeting
the nutritionally vulnerable is also an
invitation to consider the nutrition
vulnerability of individuals within
households, in addition to household-level
socio-economic situations. Furthermore,
programme designs that incorporate
nutrition education and promotion,
strengthen linkages with health services,
and focus on women are likely to improve
nutrition indicators.
Source: FAO, 2015b.

who had been given a dairy cow or a meat
goat, respectively (Rawlins et al., 2014). The
authors also noted that the programme
did not include the poorest (or the richest),
although beneficiary selection did include a
needs assessment.
Many factors determine the effectiveness
of household food-production strategies
and their effects on nutrition (Girard et al.,
2012). When infectious disease is common,
the impact of production strategies will
be limited in the absence of additional
interventions. Overall, the scarce existing
evidence suggests that production strategies
can improve intakes of micronutrientrich foods when they have clear nutrition
objectives and integrate nutrition education
and gender considerations.
Including nutrition education is important
and can enhance the impact of social
assistance programmes, home garden projects
and other farm interventions on nutrition
outcomes. Nutrition education is often
defined broadly as holistic programmes that
include a number of information-related
interventions aimed at increasing consumer
knowledge of what constitutes good
nutrition. The ultimate goal is a change in

65

66

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

behaviour, with individuals choosing more
nutritious diets and healthier lifestyles.
Such programmes may include elements
of nutrition training, public information
campaigns and regulation of advertising and
labelling. Education, in conjunction with other
interventions to improve access to diverse,
nutritious foods, can be particularly effective.
Nutrition education, including both general
education and nutrition-specific education, is
effective in improving nutrition (FAO, 2013a).
In the following sections, we discuss two
major agricultural policies – input subsidies
and credit – and issues related to improving
coherence with social protection.

Social protection and agricultural
input subsidies
Input subsidies were integral to the food
security agenda in the 1960s and 1970s,
but were widely discontinued in favour of
market-oriented solutions to rural poverty
and food insecurity. However, following a
period of heightened food insecurity, input
subsidies, in particular fertilizer subsidies,
have regained widespread popularity in
Africa, Asia and Latin America and the
Caribbean, especially following the sharp
increase in food prices and fertilizer costs
after 2006. They are now the most popular
production support measure used, although
they are typically small-scale and ad hoc
in the Latin America and the Caribbean
region (Table 3) (Demeke et al., 2014).

Input subsidies are usually implemented
by ministries of agriculture, but are often
considered as part of both social protection
policy and agricultural policy because they
are targeted at low-income small family
farmers and/or because they aim to improve
household food security and reduce hunger.
In sub-Saharan Africa, this policy has
gained momentum following the first
African Fertilizer Summit, held in Abuja,
Nigeria, in 2006, which called upon African
Union member states to improve farmers’
access to fertilizer by granting targeted
subsidies, with special attention to poor
farmers (Druilhe and Barreiro-Hurlé, 2012).
Fertilizer subsidies are also attractive because
they can raise food production within a
relatively short time, and because fertilizer
use per hectare is very low in sub-Saharan
Africa compared with other regions. For
example, the mean rates of fertilizer
application were 150 kg/ha in Asia compared
with 7 kg/ha in sub-Saharan Africa (Druilhe
and Barreiro-Hurlé, 2012).
One of the most studied programmes is
the Farm Inputs Subsidy Programme (FISP)
in Malawi. Launched in the 2005/06 season,
following a severe drought in 2004/05,
and a prolonged food shortage, FISP aims
to strengthen household food security by
boosting production and by lowering or
stabilizing food prices. The programme
covers more than 1.7 million households,
more than half of all households and more
than 60 percent of all small family farmers,
providing subsidized maize seeds and

TABLE 3
Input subsidy schemes implemented by selected countries, by scale and region, 2007–12
Region

Small-scale or ad-hoc
programmes

Large-scale
programmes

East Asia and the Pacific

Cambodia, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Thailand, Viet Nam

China, Indonesia, Philippines

Europe and Central Asia

Tajikistan

Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan

Latin America and the Caribbean

Argentina, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Haiti, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Uruguay

Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)

Middle East and North Africa

Algeria, Tunisia

Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Syrian Arab
Republic, Yemen

South Asia

Bhutan, Nepal

Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka

Sub-Saharan Africa

Chad, Lesotho, Mauritania,
Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Zimbabwe

Burkina Faso, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi,
Mali, Morocco, Nigeria, Rwanda,
Senegal, Togo, United Republic of
Tanzania, Zambia

Notes: Inputs considered include fertilizer and seeds. Subsidies may have been implemented for all or part of the period covered.
Source: Demeke et al., 2014.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

BOX 16
Fertilizer subsidies need complementary interventions to effectively promote
pro-poor growth
Fertilizer subsidies are considered to
have been successful in the experience
of Asian countries. India, Bangladesh,
Indonesia and Pakistan spent large
amounts of public funds subsidizing
fertilizer, and these subsidies are credited
with contributing to the rapid growth
in food production known as the
Green Revolution, at least in the early
stages (Djurfeldt et al., 2005). But input
subsidies were only one factor, and were
accompanied by large-scale expenditures
on research and development, extension
services, irrigation, rural roads and
development of fertilizer markets (Rashid
et al., 2013). Fertilizer subsidies should

fertilizer at a cost of about 3 percent of GDP
in 2011/12 (Chirwa and Dorward, 2013).
Significant impacts were found at the level
of households, markets and the economy
(Box 16). Strong positive effects were found
in terms of the improved availability of maize
and lower maize prices in rural markets, as
well as higher wage rates for agricultural
labour (ganyu). Maize production in the
country rose from 1.2 million tonnes in 2004
to 3.6 million tonnes in 2013, and exceeded
national requirements every year, starting
in 2005 (FAO, 2015a).36 The combination of
increased production, cheaper maize and
higher returns to ganyu reduced hunger in
food-insecure rural households. Households
that received FISP coupons were 22 percent
more likely to report “adequate” maize
production. Two-thirds of households
reported that food security had improved
at the household and community levels as a
result of the subsidy programme (Chirwa and
Dorward, 2013). The programme’s success in
raising production led to other sub-Saharan
36
We note the controversy on the size of the impacts.
Chirwa and Dorward (2013) note the discrepancy between
high levels of maize availability and concurrently high
levels of food insecurity and child malnutrition. Lunduka,
Ricker-Gilber and Fisher (2013) found that while national
production estimates suggest dramatic maize production
increases in Malawi, farm-level studies show only modest
rises in maize yields and production.

not, therefore, be seen as a panacea
for sustained agricultural growth:
they should be part of a package of
investments to be effective. Studies of
the impact of public expenditure on
growth and poverty reduction show
that roads, agricultural research and
development, education and irrigation
had the strongest impacts, much more
so than fertilizer subsidies (FAO, 2012).
Although subsidy expenditures are
frequently advocated on the basis of
equity and poverty considerations,
available evidence shows that investment
in public goods is clearly more effective
in this regard.

countries introducing similar schemes.
In general, these have been successful in
raising yields and agricultural production,
although the impact on household food
security is often not clear, due to lack of
impact evaluations (Druilhe and BarreiroHurlé, 2012).
In so far as input subsidy programmes
contribute to greater food security through
greater availability and lower prices of
staple goods, they also benefit the poor
and can be considered to be aligned with
and contributing to the objectives of social
protection policies and programmes. But,
in general, such programmes neither target
nor reach the poor (Table 4). For example,
in Zambia, 73 percent of small family farms
cultivate less than two hectares and make up
78 percent of small family farms in extreme
poverty. Yet, 55 percent of the input subsidy
went to the 23 percent of households that
cultivated more than two hectares (Mason,
Jayne and Mofya-Mukuka, 2013). Also, the
Malawi programme targeted poor farmers
who had some land and the ability to work
the plots, not necessarily the poorest (Kilic,
Whitney and Winters, 2015).
Fertilizer subsidy programmes absorb
a large part of government agricultural
budgets: for example, Burkina Faso,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mali,
Nigeria, Senegal, the United Republic of

67

68

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

TABLE 4
Shares of rural households receiving social assistance and/or agricultural input
subsidies, by type of assistance received
Social assistance
only*

Agricultural input
subsidies only**

9.8

22.2

3.2

64.8

Kenya (2005)

13.7

2.2

0.1

84.0

Malawi (2011)

2.6

48.1

2.9

46.4

Niger (2011)

2.5

2.7

0.3

94.5

United Republic of Tanzania (2009)

2.8

1.9

0.1

95.3

Both

Neither

Percent
Ethiopia (2012)

Notes: *Social assistance includes all types of transfers (conditional or unconditional, and cash or in-kind), with the
exception of scholarships and school feeding. **Agricultural input subsidies include seed and fertilizer subsidies.
Sources: Authors’ calculations using household survey data. For a list of all surveys consulted, see Household Survey
references at the end of the report (p. 127).

Tanzania and Zambia spent US$1 billion, or
28.6 percent of their public expenditures,
on agriculture in 2011 (Jayne and Rashid,
2013).37 The linkages of these single,
stand-alone, input programmes with social
protection could include improving the
reach of input subsidies to the poorest
households by, for instance, improving
targeting and/or adjusting the size and type
of input packages to the specific needs of
small family farmers. Targeting the poorest
is best achieved through input packages
designed for their needs. For example, in
Zambia, the Food Security Pack Programme
is aimed at households cultivating less than
0.5 hectare, and consists of input packs
for 0.25 hectare of cereal, 0.25 hectare of
cassava and 0.25 hectare of legumes. It is
free for the first two years, after which
farmers are to repay half of the value in
kind. The programme is relatively small
scale, receiving only 5 percent of the value
allocated to the FISP (Burke, Jayne and Sitko,
2012). Another option is to combine these
with social cash transfer programmes that
provide the poorest beneficiaries with the

37
Fertilizer input subsidies have been criticized for a
number of reasons. The impacts of fertilizer subsidy
programmes in sub-Saharan Africa are not well
documented and therefore contested (Druilhe and
Barreiro-Hurlé, 2012). Monitoring and evaluation are basic
requirements for improving programmes and making good
policy decisions. For more detail on the pros and cons of
fertilizer subsidy programmes and how to improve them,
see, for example, Chirwa and Dorward (2013); Rashid et al.
(2013), and; Jayne and Rashid (2013).

additional liquidity needed for paying for
the “unsubsidized” part of the input.

Credit to agriculture
Credit constraints are a major barrier to
agricultural investment. Relatively little
credit is allocated to agriculture and many
agricultural producers are credit-constrained.
Rural households have little access to formal
credit. In parts of East and West Africa, for
example, Adesina (2010) found that only
about 3 percent of commercial credit went to
agriculture, even though the sector accounted
for 50 to 70 percent of GDP. Similarly, in
Honduras, Nicaragua and Peru, 40 percent
of all agricultural producers were creditconstrained (World Bank, 2007). Zezza et al.
(2007) found that across ten countries in subSaharan Africa, Asia and Latin America, less
than 40 percent of agricultural households use
credit (including loans from family members
and relatives), and in most countries no more
than about one in ten agricultural households
use credit. In part, this is also because informal
credit is often very expensive (Banerjee and
Duflo, 2007). In many countries, addressing
credit market failures, through special
programmes, credit guarantee schemes and
specialized banks, is a priority. Nearly all Asian,
Latin American and Caribbean countries,
and a majority of African countries, are
taking measures to facilitate the provision of
agricultural credit (Table 5).
In Brazil, the support and promotion of
family farming has been a government

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

priority in recent years. For this purpose,
the National Programme for Strengthening
Family Farming (Pronaf – Programa Nacional
de Fortalecimento da Agricultura Familiar)
was created in 2003. It includes, among
several activities, credit provision for
productive rural activities. In recent years,
Pronaf financed about two million loans,
especially in regions where rural poverty is
concentrated, worth about US$10 billion.
Credit is now provided at a subsidized annual
interest rate of 2 percent to support family
farms and covered by insurance (Box 17) (Del
Grossi and Marques, 2015).
Pronaf also provides microcredit for poorer
farmers with an annual gross income up to
20 000 reais (about US$8 800). Microcredit
is more extensive in the northeast of Brazil,
where the Bank of the Northeast of Brazil
offers a line of credit called Agroamigo that
provides farmers with direct monitoring
services by a consultant, who also helps them
draw up investment plans. In 2013, Agroamigo
microcredit loans accounted for more than
20 percent of all Pronaf loans.
However, directly targeting the poorest
with (micro) credit has proven difficult. In
reality, the majority of the world’s estimated
150 million microcredit clients are thought
to live just below and, more often, just
above the poverty line (Hashemi and de
Montesquiou, 2011). In other words, they
are not the poorest. This is because the
poorest households often lack the assets and
skills to take advantage of credit, and may
find it difficult to repay even small loans.
Furthermore, although microcredit has been

shown to improve household welfare in
Bangladesh (Khandker and Samad, 2014),
this is not always the case. Recent evidence
from six studies found that microcredit
had a mixed impact on food consumption
(mostly no effect). Moreover, these studies
found no clear evidence that microcredit
reduces poverty or improves living standards
as measured by total household income
(Banerjee, Karlan and Zinman, 2015).
However, evidence from cash transfer
programmes also shows that even when credit
was available many beneficiaries preferred to
reduce their debt rather than take on more
credit (Barca et al., 2015). There is increasing
evidence that, on its own, microcredit is not
sufficient to help poor households exit poverty
or to improve their welfare as measured
by consumption, health, education, and
women’s empowerment (Banerjee, Karlan and
Zinman, 2015). For the poorest, microcredit
must be part of a package of interventions,
or of a joint programme that includes social
assistance (Barrientos, 2012). For example, in
Bangladesh, BRAC’s CFPR-TUP involves multiple
interventions, including access to credit and cash
transfers, and aims to ultimately graduate the
poorest out of poverty by joining microcredit
programmes (see also Chapter 2, p. 34).

Institutional procurement
programmes
Lack of adequate markets is an important
limitation on agricultural growth and rural
development. An innovative approach to this

TABLE 5
Major credit instruments adopted by select countries, by type and region, 2007–12
Region

Credit expansion

Interest rate subsidy

Both

East Asia and the Pacific

Cambodia, China, Thailand

Indonesia, Viet Nam

Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Philippines

Latin America and
the Caribbean

Cuba

Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica,
Dominican Republic,
Guatemala, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Paraguay, Panama

Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Brazil, Colombia,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Peru,
Venezuela

Iran, Iraq, Syrian Arab
Republic

Algeria, Egypt, Morocco

Middle East and North
Africa
South Asia

Bangladesh

Nepal

India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka

Sub-Saharan Africa

Lesotho, Malawi,
Mauritania, Rwanda,
Zambia

Kenya, Tunisia, Uganda,
Zimbabwe

Ghana, Mozambique,
Nigeria, South Africa, United
Republic of Tanzania

Notes: Instruments may have been adopted for all or part of the periods covered.
Source: Demeke et al., 2014.

69

70

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

BOX 17
Agricultural insurance
Rural credit can help promote rural
development, but can also lead to
indebtedness for rural producers. Tying
credit to insurance can therefore help
credit markets work. In Brazil, the
government introduced the Family
Farming Insurance (SEAF) programme
in 2004 to support loans made by the
National Programme for Strengthening
Family Farming (Pronaf), in case of
losses due to natural disasters, pests and
diseases that affect crops. Currently, SEAF
covers costs and agricultural investment
contracts, where there are relevant
agronomic studies available. In case
of losses, the beneficiary farmer has
100 percent coverage for credit repayment
for that year, and receives up to 7 000 reais
(about US$3 100) in compensation for any
shortfall in revenues.
Another important innovation,
introduced in 2006/07, is the Family
Farming Price Guarantee Programme
(PGPAF – Programa de Garantia de
Preços para a Agricultura Familiar),
which provides a discount on Pronaf
loans whenever the market price of the
financed product is below the guaranteed
price. Guarantee prices are fixed at
the beginning of the crop cycle, using
production costs as reference. As this
price guarantee was designed to benefit
poorer farmers, the bonuses are currently
limited to 5 000 reais (about US$2 200) for
funding contracts, and up to 2 000 reais
(about US$900) for investment contracts.
In general, agricultural insurance, unless
free or subsidized, is not affordable to
the poor. In Brazil, the SEAF programme
provides crop insurance to family

constraint has been the effort to align social
protection programmes with agricultural
objectives by using social protection
programmes to create markets for small family
farmers. So-called institutional procurement
programmes (IPPs) purchase food locally, either
directly from farmers or from traders, for use
in social assistance programmes such as school

farmers, and the government pays a
75 percent premium subsidy. Furthermore,
agricultural insurance schemes are
not widespread due to the myriad
of associated information problems.
Index-based insurance schemes can
help overcome some of these problems.
Most common are weather index-based
schemes, where the contracts are based
on deviations from some weatherrelated index, such as rainfall over time.
All policy holders within a defined area
receive payouts based on the same
contract and measurement at the same
station, eliminating the need for in-field
assessment (IFAD and WFP, 2011).
India introduced the National
Agricultural Insurance Scheme in 1999.
Today, it insures about 15 percent of all
farmers (Demeke et al., 2014). The scheme
is based on a yield index approach with
payouts triggered when crop yields in a
defined area fall below historical yields.
In sub-Saharan Africa insurance is rare,
but there are some examples of weather
index-based insurance schemes. For
example, in Ethiopia, Nyala Insurance, a
private insurance company, offers weather
index-based insurance to farmer members
of a cooperative, thus achieving some
economies of scale. The company insures
all farmers in the cooperative, and the
cooperative is responsible for paying the
premium and for distributing potential
payouts (Meherette, 2009). A limitation
of weather index-based insurance is
that 30 years of historical daily rainfall
data are needed to make such a scheme
operational.

feeding, food reserves, hospitals or distribution
through charitable organizations.38

38
Institutional buyers are public- or private-sector entities,
such as schools, food reserve authorities, the military, prisons,
hospitals, food aid organizations and relief or development
agencies, that purchase large quantities/volumes of produce
from farmers or traders in the domestic market.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

Institutional demand policies promote
rural development by creating a market
for small family farm produce. However,
interventions that link social assistance
with institutional demand also typically
focus on supporting poorer farmers who
are constrained in their access to resources.
Ultimately, the aim is to increase agricultural
production by small family farmers;
improve farmers’ and extension workers’
skills and knowledge of food production
and marketing, and link small producer
organizations with local markets in general.

Home-grown school-feeding
programmes
One approach to IPP is to purchase locally for
school feeding, often referred to as homegrown school-feeding (HGSF) programmes.39
They aim to provide food to children
and improve school enrolment, but may
also include health programmes, such as
deworming, vaccination and dental hygiene.
Some programmes integrate other initiatives
such as teacher training, community gardens
and nutrition information for parents. One
of the main goals is to promote community
participation through committees, parent
associations and school boards.
In some middle-income countries, HGSF
is considered a strategy to promote rural
development as well as to provide a social
safety net. HGSF, by delivering food to poor
and food-insecure individuals, helps to
alleviate hunger and reduce malnutrition.
Moreover, it also helps families to avoid
adopting damaging coping strategies, such
as selling productive assets or sending their
children to work to raise money for food.
Also, non-beneficiary farmers benefit when
they supply food to HGSF programmes.
Appropriately designed programmes can
also contribute to closing the gender gap in
education, especially in rural areas with large
gender disparities in access to education
(Gelli, Neeser and Drake, 2010). In Indonesia,
during the financial crises, the government

39
Procurement modalities vary by programme and the
amount of food purchased from local farmers also varies.
When school-feeding programmes are implemented in
areas with high chronic food insecurity, food production
capacity is low and local procurement is more difficult
(Devereux, Sabates-Wheeler and Pascual Martínez, 2010).

implemented an HGSF programme which
purchased cassava, banana and rice from
local producers, generating benefits to poor
communities (see also Box 18) (Studdert et
al., 2004). In particular, the programme is
credited with providing income benefits, not
only to families with schoolchildren but also
to the farmers who provide the food and to
the women who prepare the food. Children’s
education and nutrition also benefited, with
implications for longer-term human resource
development.
HGSF programmes are included in
the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme (CAADP) and
New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD) as part of the effort to decrease
food insecurity and link vulnerable people to
opportunities for agricultural growth. Today,
HGSF programmes are being implemented
in at least 20 African countries, sometimes
building on WFP’s Purchase for Progress (P4P)
programme (see below).

The World Food Programme’s Purchase
for Progress programme
The WFP is a major purchaser of food:
in 2013, the organization bought
US$1.16 billion worth of staple foods,
80 percent of which was supplied by
traders in developing countries. In an
effort to leverage this, local and regional
procurement for building the capacity
of small family farmers, WFP introduced
the P4P programme. Starting in 2008, a
five-year programme was implemented
in 20 countries in Africa, Asia and Central
America.40 Under the pilot, WFP tested
different ways of procuring staple foods
from small family farmers, aiming to identify
models that could sustainably promote small
family farm development through enhanced
access to formal markets. The P4P approach
entails consistent demand for quality food;
targeted capacity-strengthening of small
family farmers, typically through producer
organizations; and coordination and linkage
support for providers of key supply chain
services (see also Box 19).

40
See https://www.wfp.org/purchase-progress. A series of
recent P4P case studies is also available at http://www.fao.
org/ag/ags/ivc/institutional-procurement/en/.

71

72

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Over the five-year pilot period, WFP
succeeded in procuring 367 000 tonnes of
food from small family farmers, putting
more than US$148 million more directly into
the hands of the farmers and their families
(US$30 million per year, on average). Further,
producer organizations not previously selling
collectively sold another US$60 million
worth of quality food to buyers beyond WFP.
Across the pilot, WFP entered into over 500

partnerships, well over half of which were
formalized through agreements. Beyond
government ministries and agencies, WFP’s
partners included international and local
NGOs, umbrella producer organizations,
United Nations agencies, input suppliers,
output aggregators, processors, financial
service providers, research institutions,
bilateral development partners and regional
entities (WFP, 2014).

BOX 18
Home-grown school feeding in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Honduras
School feeding covers 87 percent of
schools in the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
The reformed public procurement law
establishes that food procured for schoolfeeding programmes and other food
security initiatives must come from national
producers. Farmers were able to supply a
wide range of produce such as rice, maize
and quinoa, as well as processed foods
such as biscuits and dairy products. In the
municipalities of Villa Alcalá, Tomina,
Yamparaéz and Zudanez, local governments
have procured organic produce from
small-scale farmers to strengthen their
participation in organic food markets
(FAO, 2013b). The government has also
promoted small-scale organic production
by incorporating organic bananas in the
school meals. This experience has generated
several positive outcomes for small family
farmers (Bioversity International, 2012).
Farmers have more than doubled the area
devoted to bananas to respond to demand
and have adopted more efficient harvest
and post-harvest practices. Over 85 percent
of producers reported higher incomes and
increased consumption, including milk and
meat.
In Honduras, the government funded
and implemented the Vaso de Leche
programme to complement school meals.
In 2012, it covered over 638 000 children in
143 different, mainly rural, municipalities.
The main goal of the programme is
to improve the nutritional status of
children at preschool and primary levels
by increasing their protein and calcium
intakes. Additionally, the programme

aims to promote rural development by
making direct purchases from small-scale
dairy producers. It offers producers fixed
prices throughout the year, guaranteeing
steady incomes. The main requirement
to participate in the programme is to
be certified by the National Agricultural
Health and Safety Service. In many cases,
producers formed groups to create
processing and storage centres that
facilitate direct purchases of milk by the
programme. The Agriculture and Livestock
Secretariat has implemented a series of
projects to provide technical assistance,
infrastructure and finance to producers
involved in the programme, considered
one of the best cases of institutional
demand for small family farmers in Central
America (FAO, 2013b).
The success of the linkages between small
family farm agriculture and school-feeding
programmes is largely attributed to the
favourable legislative framework for public
procurement. Both countries’ laws aimed at
creating markets for national producers and
increasing the participation of small- and
medium-scale enterprises. They allowed
local governments to purchase directly
from producer organizations and family
farmers, reducing burdensome tendering
requirements. In addition, governments
in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and in
Honduras prioritized public procurement of
food from national producers in their public
policies, facilitating the implementation of
HGSF programmes.
Source: Nehring, Miranda and Howe, 2014.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

BOX 19
Producer organizations play a key role
For small family farmers, being
competitive in supplying larger private
or public buyers is a major challenge
that requires meeting strict standards
and achieving scale in delivery, for which
effective producer organizations are
essential. Producer organizations can
play an important role in overcoming
constraints and obstacles that individual
farmers may face. They enable the
pooling of resources, such as credit,
information, labour and transport, thus
creating economies of scale to reduce
transaction costs and generate some
market power. Producer organizations
can help build farmers’ skills; provide
information and knowledge; help them
tackle legal issues, certification and
registration; and give them some voice
in national and sometimes international
fora. Governments can support producer
organizations by providing enabling
conditions and a supporting policy and
legal framework as well as economic
incentives (FAO, 2012). Among the betterknown producer organizations is the
Indian Dairy Cooperatives Network. In
2005, the Indian dairy cooperatives, with
12.3 million members, accounted for
22 percent of the milk produced in India.
Sixty percent of cooperative members are
landless, very small farmers and/or women.
For example, in Ethiopia, within
the context of the Maize Alliance – a
partnership designed and coordinated by
the Agricultural Transformation Agency,
drawing on a range of actors from federal
and regional governments, the United
Nations, NGOs, and the private sector –
WFP targeted 50 000 farmers to purchase
from for school feeding in the 2009–13

The Brazilian experience: linking family
farming and markets for institutional
purposes
Brazil was the first country to develop
an institutional food procurement
programme by connecting the
development of guaranteed demand

period. In addition, the Alliance provided
31 cooperative unions, representing
over 1 million small family farmers,
with enhanced access to farm inputs,
alongside training and capacity building
in production practices, post-harvest
handling, efficient aggregation and
commercialization services. The pooled
investments led to cooperative unions’
sales of quality food to WFP valued at over
US$25 million. Within this collaboration,
WFP, the Agricultural Transformation
Agency and the Commercial Bank of
Ethiopia signed a Tripartite Agreement
to support the provision of output
financing through loans advanced using
WFP contracts as collateral. Cooperative
unions with P4P contracts were perceived
by financial institutions as good risks,
allowing them to build new storage
structures, buy on time, pay on time,
and meet WFP’s stringent contractual
requirements.
The P4P approach faces many
challenges, some country-specific,
others more general. For example, price
discovery in remote locations is complex;
providing credit for small family farmers,
reaching women farmers, and finding
and supporting supply-side partners who
can help provide technical expertise and
build capacity, are also major challenges.
One issue common to all IPPs is the need
to monitor and evaluate programmes
effectively to better inform policy
and establish innovative procurement
modalities (see Box 20).

for small producers with a food security
strategy. The food procurement
programme, the Programa de Aquisição
de Alimentos (PAA) and the national
school-feeding programme, the Programa
Nacional de Alimentacão Escolar (PNAE)
are the two most important IPPs in

73

74

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

BOX 20
Creating appropriate legal frameworks
The benefits of institutional demand
to small family farmers greatly depend
on the procurement model used by
governments. Buying food directly from
associations and cooperatives reduces the
role of private intermediaries, ensuring
more favourable prices for producers.
In addition, producer organizations can
help reduce transactions costs, enabling
small-scale producers to engage more
fully in formal markets. Outside of
cooperatives, certain IPP modalities
allow farmers to deliver a specific
amount of produce at a fixed price. This
arrangement offers several advantages
as it provides a market and guaranteed
incomes, reducing risks and uncertainties.
Nonetheless, procurement from
producer organizations can be riskier and
costlier than procurement from private
traders. Splitting tenders into smaller
bids leads to supply fragmentation,
which entails processing more bids,
assessing and monitoring the quality
of several different lots and organizing
transportation. There are also the costs
of providing training programmes to
cooperatives and the higher default
rates among farmer groups, as they are
more vulnerable to risks. However, these
costs can be reduced with appropriate
investments in capacity building targeted
at producer organizations.
The rules that shape tendering are
central to achieving rural development
outcomes as they can encourage
or hamper small-scale producer
participation (Sumberg and SabatesWheeler, 2010). Bureaucratic systems
and burdensome requirements make it
difficult for small producers to participate
without effective targeting. However, the
greater scale of demand is more likely
to stimulate production and generate
backward and forward linkages. In
addition, food can be transferred from
surplus areas to food-insecure areas.
An appropriate legal framework is
key to successful procurement policies to

purchase food from small family farmers.
Several types of legislation provide such
a framework including contract law,
health and safety regulations and rules
relating to cooperatives and producer
organizations.
Public procurement processes are
usually heavily regulated to minimize
corruption and waste. However, this can
pose severe obstacles to public purchases
from small farms and producers. In many
cases, they have deterred small family
farmer participation in school-feeding
programmes despite their capacity to
respond to the demand. In addition,
legislation for producer organizations
often requires bureaucratic procedures
and complex accountability mechanisms.
This may result in producer organizations
being unable to obtain formal status
and cannot carry out certain financial
transactions. To address these challenges,
governments can implement policies
that favour small family farmers in public
procurement processes. Some examples:
• Allocate specific percentages or
quotas of the total amount of public
purchases to small family farmers.
• Promote tender processes specifically
designed for small family farmers.
• Subdivide large purchases so that
small-scale producers can respond.

Source: Nehring, Miranda and Howe, 2014.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

Brazil.41 The PAA operates through several
modalities, including support for building
stocks, the incentive for the production
and consumption of milk (PAA Milk), and
institutional purchases.
The PAA was launched in 2003 as part of
the Zero Hunger Programme and aimed to
support family farmers to produce and access
markets, distribute food to people to ensure
food security and nutrition, and build up
strategic stocks. Both the PAA and the PNAE
have limits to their purchases from individual
or farmer groups, although PNAE sets higher
limits as scale is needed to supply schools.
To ensure that the poorest benefit from the
PAA, priority access is given to family farmers
registered with CadÚnico who benefit from
Bolsa Família. The programme expanded
rapidly from US$50.2 million for 41 500
family farmers in 2003 to US$410.3 million
for 185 500 farmers in 2012 (Del Grossi and
Marques, 2015). After ten years in operation,
the PAA had purchased more than 3 million
tonnes of food from over 200 000 family
farms. Nevertheless, it constitutes only
0.0004 percent of Brazil’s GDP (IPC-IG and
WFP, 2013).
To take part in the PAA, farmers must have
a valid Pronaf eligibility declaration (DAP),
ensuring exclusive participation by family
farmers (Box 21). Through the DAP, farmers
are classified by poverty and vulnerability, to
determine the poorest and most vulnerable.
It is established by law that they are to
receive preference as potential participants
in the PAA.
There was concern at the start of the PAA
programme that family farms would not
be able to respond to government stimuli.

The PNAE has existed since the 1950s, but was only linked
with family farming policies in 2009. Now, state, municipality
and federal schools must purchase at least 30 percent of food
for school meals directly from family farmers. The PNAE has
expanded rapidly and, in 2014, had a budget of 3.5 billion
reais (about US$1.54 billion), benefiting 47.2 million students.
Of this amount, approximately US$460 million (1.05 billion
reais) was reserved for direct purchases of family farm
products (Del Grossi and Marques, 2015). However, only
45 percent of implementing agencies comply with the legally
mandated minimum requirement of 30 percent purchase
from family farmers (Swensson, 2015). Lessons from the
Brazilian experience are also strengthening school nutrition
programmes in other countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean (see http://www.fao.org/in-action/program-brazilfao/projects/school-feeding/en/).
41

For this reason, a host of programmes –
including those facilitating access to rural
credit, insurance, technical assistance and
extension, gender-affirmative actions and
a programme for investment in transport,
energy and sanitation – supported family
farmers to achieve greater commercialization
(see also Box 22) (Del Grossi and Marques,
2015). A second challenge, the system of
bidding for public purchases, was addressed
by the introduction of appropriate laws.
There has been no nationwide impact
evaluation of the Brazilian IPPs. Evaluations
to date have used qualitative case studies
and small-scale surveys of one to five
municipalities (IPC-IG and WFP, 2013). These
studies identify diversification and increase
in family farm production; increased income
and strengthening and development of
collective organizations as some of the most
common impacts of the PAA.
Doretto and Michellon (2007) surveyed
PAA beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries to
study the impact of procurement on family
farm incomes in three municipalities in
the state of Paraná. Their survey showed
an income increase of 25.2 percent among
programme participants who had accessed
family farm credit and a 43 percent increase
in income for those who had not received
credit (Doretto and Michellon, 2007).
Also, one-third of PAA beneficiaries in
the sample had increased their cultivated
areas while two-thirds had improved their
crop production technology. The improved
income, planted area and technology level
helped create a better division of labour
within the household, allowing family
members to work outside agriculture and
diversify their income sources. One-third of
participating families in two of the sampled
municipalities reported incomes from sources
other than agriculture.
The PAA provided incentives to diversify
production, which led to expanded
commercialization opportunities for farmers
(Vogt and Souza, 2009). The case study of
the Celeiro region in the state of Rio Grande
do Sul, focusing on two municipalities,
noted the PAA’s ability to add a social
dimension and structure to local markets
and commercialization channels for farmers
who were otherwise resource-poor. By
guaranteeing market access and prices, the

75

76

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

BOX 21
The Family Farm Register
The Pronaf DAP (Declaração de Aptidão
ao Pronaf) eligibility declaration is a
document certifying that the producer
or formal organization complies with
all the requirements established by
law and can be classified as a “family
farmer” or “rural family entrepreneur”.
This signifies that: (i) the rural property
does not exceed four fiscal modules;1
(ii) the labour used in rural activities
is predominantly family-based; (iii) a
minimum percentage of family income
is generated by activities using the
rural property or enterprise and; (iv)
the establishment is directly managed
by the family. A DAP is issued for free
by authorized institutions, such as the
official entities of technical aid and rural
extension or agriculture federations
and confederations. It is issued for a

PAA was key to expanding production for
participating families (Vogt and Souza, 2009).
Purchases through the PAA have created
new relations among family farms,
intermediaries, local officials and consumers
that have altered the viability of local food
systems. The incomes of PAA participants
in the northeast of Brazil were three times
greater than for non-participants (Sparovek,
et al., 2007). This is not only because
participants have more income from sales to
the PAA, but also because non-participants
tended to be subsistence producers. The
new Brazil without Poverty strategy aims
to expand DAP registration to incorporate
around 200 000 family farmers living below
the poverty line. The vast majority of these
farmers live in Brazil’s northeast region,
which has the highest incidence of poverty in
the country.
In Campina do Monte Alegre in São Paulo,
the prices offered through the PAA were
45.9 percent higher than the average price
offered by other intermediaries (Agapto et
al., 2012). Lucena and Luiz (2009) found that
for a sample of seven PAA participants in the
state of Rio Grande do Norte, higher prices
increased incomes by 43 percent, on average.

family unit or a formal organization
(DAP-legal person) and has become an
essential document for participating in
all Brazilian public programmes related
to family farming, including institutional
procurement programmes. An individual
DAP has a regular duration of six years
while the DAP-legal person (issued
to formal groups that have at least
70 percent of their members with a DAP)
lasts for only one year. In August 2014,
there were 5 073 215 active DAPs for
private individuals, and 2 900 for legal
entities.

1

A fiscal module is a unit of measure for rural
property that can vary by municipality.

Sources: Swensson, 2015 and Del Grossi and
Marques, 2015.

The reference prices provide incentives for
farmers to produce higher-value vegetables
and other food crops (Agapto et al., 2012).

Purchase from Africans for Africa
The Purchase from Africans for Africa
Programme (PAA Africa) adapted the
Brazilian experience of PAA food purchases
from family farmers for implementation
in five African countries: Ethiopia, Malawi,
Mozambique, the Niger and Senegal.42
It has combined productive inclusion for
family farmers with food assistance and
social protection for vulnerable populations.
PAA Africa began in 2012 and, over the
course of two years, supported over 5 000
family farmers, mostly organized in producer
organizations, and benefited over 128 000
schoolchildren with locally procured
school meals. In the Niger, as part of the
3N initiative, PAA Africa also used local
food purchases to support crisis prevention
and management by supplying national
security stocks. Farmers received agricultural
inputs and training, resulting in substantial

42

For more detail, see PAA Africa (2015).

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

productivity increases. For example, in
Ethiopia, participating farmers supplying
haricot red beans increased their productivity
by 50 percent, while, in Senegal, rice farmers
raised their productivity by over 300 percent
(PAA Africa, 2014). On average, 37 percent of
the food produced by participating farmers
was purchased by the programme.

Bringing the sectors together: the
critical issue of targeting
A fundamental operational issue to be
addressed in bringing the sectors together
is the targeting of interventions. In some
countries, the tendency has been to avoid
targeting the same households with social
protection and agricultural input subsidy
programmes on the grounds of equity; in
others, the focus has been on potential
synergies among the different programmes.
Whether or not the objective is to allow
programme overlap, an important challenge
in implementing multiple programmes is the
identification of target households (see also
Box 23). The experiences of several countries
show that single or unified registries (such

as the CadÚnico in Brazil and the Padrón
General de Hogares in Peru) or unified
targeting systems (such as the Ficha de
Protección Social in Chile, or the Sistema
de Focalización de Hogares in Peru), are
particularly useful if several programmes
have overlapping objectives and target
populations.
The case of Peru is a clear example of
a conscious effort to create synergies
within and between policy areas. Juntos,
a conditional cash transfer programme in
rural Peru, selects its beneficiaries using
data provided by the unified household
registry (Padrón General de Hogares)
and the targeting system Sistema de
Focalización de Hogares. The same data
and targeting system are also used for
other social programmes (such as the
nutrition programmes Vaso de Leche,
Comedores Populares and Programa Integral
de Nutrición, as well as the free health
insurance scheme Seguro Integral de Salud).
Moreover, the Government of Peru has
also tried to achieve targeting synergies
between social protection and agricultural
interventions, thereby strengthening the
linkage between policy areas. In particular,

BOX 22
The Brazilian Water Cistern Programme
The Water Cistern Programme was
created in 2003 and extended in 2011 as
the National Programme for Universal
Access and Use of Water (Water for All).
It promotes universal access to water in
rural areas – for human consumption and
agriculture, including raising animals – with
the aim of enhancing the food and nutrition
security of socially vulnerable families. It is
targeted at populations living in extreme
poverty and implemented by means of the
construction of cisterns, collective water
supply systems and small dams.
The programme is organized into three
initiatives:
• Water for human consumption (“first
water”) consists of building cisterns to
collect and store rainwater for human
consumption, aimed at rural families
who lack access to drinking water.

Priority beneficiaries are the eligible
families registered in CadÚnico.
• Water for production (“second
water”) is for families who have
already been provided with a cistern
for human consumption. The second
water introduces social technologies
to capture and store of rainwater for
agriculture, especially for vegetable
gardens and small livestock.
• Cisterns in schools consists of
building cisterns to capture and store
rainwater for human consumption or
for vegetable garden production in
municipal schools in the rural areas of
the Brazilian semi-arid region.

Source: Del Grossi and Marques (2015).

77

78

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

BOX 23
Targeting methods for agricultural interventions
Agricultural interventions use a variety
of targeting methods such as those
described in Box 13 (p. 54). Frequently
geographical targeting is used to select
an area for intervention, and is then
often combined with other criteria such
as poverty, risk of drought, vulnerability
to climate change, cultivation of certain
crops, steepness of land, or degree of
urbanization.
Geographical targeting. In agricultural
interventions aimed at reducing rural
poverty, geographical targeting often
follows the same logic as in social
protection programmes and intervention
areas selected by poverty incidence
criteria. Unlike in social protection,
geographical targeting is based not
only on poverty maps or povertyrelated criteria, but also on the type
of agricultural intervention, such as
irrigation, rural development, natural
resource management or land reform. For
example, the Adapting to Markets and
Climate Change Project (NICADAPTA),
which promotes adaptation to climate
change among small coffee and cocoa
farmers in Nicaragua, uses geographical

the rural development programme Haku
Wiñay, which aims at strengthening the
productive and income-generating capacities
of extremely poor farmers, targets villages
based on the percentage of inhabitants who
are beneficiaries of Juntos. The Peruvian case
shows that, when agricultural programmes
aim to reach the poor, the targets of these
interventions could overlap with social
protection programme targets (Ministerio
de Desarrollo e Inclusión Social, Gobierno
del Perú, 2012). The synergies created by
the targeting system in Peru allow for
implementation of a more cost-effective
targeting strategy and also for improved
monitoring of the coverage of social
protection and agricultural programmes
(Cirillo, Gyorgi and Soares, 2014).

targeting combined with poverty and
other criteria. Intervention areas have
to be suitable for coffee and cocoa
production and be characterized by
vulnerability to climate change. The
selection of intervention communities
and districts in these areas is based on
the prevalence of poverty, as well as the
number of indigenous and Afro-Caribbean
families able to benefit from it (Cirillo,
Gyori and Soares, 2014).
Community-based targeting.
Community-based targeting draws
on local knowledge, as opposed to
centralized coordination, in order to
identify programme beneficiaries.
One example is the United Republic of
Tanzania’s input voucher programme.
While the allocation of input vouchers
among districts and villages is based
on geographical criteria, allocation
within villages is organized by “Village
Voucher Committees”. These committees
compile a list of beneficiaries, based on
the programme’s targeting criteria and
upon approval of the list by the village
assembly, input vouchers are distributed
to the beneficiaries.

Key messages
• A large variety of options exist to
coordinate social protection and
agricultural interventions more
effectively. The options range from
stand-alone, sector-specific, social
protection or agricultural programmes,
to integrated interventions that
combine social protection and
agriculture, to sectoral interventions
that are aligned to maximize
complementarities.
• Combining social protection with
agricultural interventions is more
effective in addressing the multiple
constraints faced by small family
farmers.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

Categorical targeting. In certain
circumstances, categorical targeting can
be cost-effective for selecting programme
beneficiaries based on easily observable
characteristics. For example, the Colombian
land reform, Ley de Restitución de Tierras,
aims at compensating citizens who lost
their land during Colombia’s armed
conflict. The targeting is categorical in the
sense that all citizens belonging to the
category “victims of the armed conflict who
lost their land” are eligible, irrespective of
their socio-economic status, geographical
location or other characteristics.
Self-targeting. Self-targeting is less common,
but is gaining popularity for agricultural
interventions. One approach is to draw on
self-selection. An example for this method is
the Projet d’irrigation et de gestion de l’eau
à petite echelle (PIGEPE) project in Burkina
Faso, which provides micro-irrigation
kits only attractive to farmers with small
landholdings. Only farmers who are part of
the target group will acquire these kits.
Means testing. A means test can be an
effective and transparent measure for
selecting beneficiaries if the target group

• Social protection can complement
agricultural policies, such as input
subsidies and credit, to benefit poor
small family farm households more
directly and to contribute to a more
coherent rural development strategy.
Other types of intervention may also
be needed for households to take
advantage of agricultural inputs and
credit.
• Institutional procurement programmes
represent an innovative approach to
aligning social protection programmes
with agricultural development
objectives, by using the demand created
by these programmes to create markets
for family farms.

can be described by economic criteria
and if data on these criteria are readily
available. For example, participation in the
programmes of the Chilean public Instituto
de Desarrollo Agropecuario (INDAP) is
open only to small family farmers who
fulfil the following economic criteria: their
agricultural assets may not exceed a value
of approximately US$140 000, the area
under their cultivation must be below
a location-specific limit, and agriculture
must be the households’ main source of
income. In order to apply for participation
in the INDAP programmes, farmers have to
provide a number of standardized official
documents that can prove their eligibility,
and INDAP may schedule farm visits to
verify the correctness of the documents
provided.

Source: Cirillo, Gyori and Soares, 2014.

• Targeting beneficiaries can improve
coherence between social protection
and agriculture. Appropriate targeting
instruments and design are needed
to accurately identify beneficiaries of
multiple programmes with different
objectives.

79

80

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

6 Conclusions: building on synergies
between social protection and
agricultural policies to break the
cycle of rural poverty

Poverty and malnutrition remain
unconscionably high in many parts of the
world, and rural people who depend on
agriculture for their livelihoods find it
particularly hard to break the cycle of poverty.
Social protection measures combined with
agricultural policies that target the rural poor
can be transformative. While social protection
programmes have increased in recent
years, and some of them have made special
efforts to reach agricultural households with
complementary interventions, much more
needs to be done.
The majority of the poor live in rural areas
and depend on agriculture for substantial
parts of their income and food security,
whether directly or indirectly. Over the long
term, economic growth is essential for the
poor to develop sustainable livelihoods
that take them permanently out of poverty.
Growth originating in agriculture is
particularly powerful in reducing poverty in
countries that are predominantly agricultural.
But this is a longer-term scenario. The poor
need immediate help to avoid poverty and
hunger, which in themselves undermine the
ability of individuals and households to be
productive both now and in the future. Social
protection can also play an important role
in the longer-term context of the structural
transformation of agriculture by making
the process more inclusive, and less painful,
through mitigating the costs farmers face
in adjusting to changes and by enabling
households to diversify out of agriculture.
These basic principles were, and remain, key
drivers of several large-scale and high-profile
social protection programmes in developing
countries, notably in Brazil, Ethiopia, India,
Mexico and South Africa, which have given
impetus to a reassessment of the value and

role of such programmes in combating
poverty and hunger, as well as social,
economic and political inequality.
Evidence of such renewed interest was
provided by the Social Protection Floor (SPF)
initiative (Box 24), launched by the United
Nations system Chief Executive Board for
Coordination in 2009 and endorsed by the
United Nations General Assembly during its
MDG Summit of September 2010.43
Perhaps the strongest endorsement of social
protection programmes is the rapid increase
in the number of programmes in developing
country that aim to reduce poverty and
hunger. In 2014, at least 145 countries provided
one or more forms of social assistance, the
type of social protection generally most
focused on the poorest and most vulnerable.
In developing countries, such programmes
cover at least partially about 1.5 billion poor
and vulnerable people, a third of whom are
extremely poor. However, many of the poorest
are not reached, largely because the coverage
of social assistance programmes is still limited
in many poor countries.
This is, in part, because financing such
programmes will often require difficult
expenditure choices. Donor support will be
essential in the short-to-medium term in some
countries, but the use of domestic resources
is important if social assistance programmes
are to be politically and financially sustainable
in the longer term. Generating domestic
revenue requires a policy dialogue aimed at
building a national consensus on the nature,
scale and financing of social assistance within
a country.
43
The concept of social protection, as envisaged by the
SPF, covers a wide array of objectives and instruments,
considerably broader than those discussed in this report.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

Social protection programmes are
effective in reducing poverty and
hunger
There is now substantial evidence showing
that social protection programmes are
effective in reducing poverty and hunger.
In 2013, social protection brought up to
150 million people out of extreme poverty.
Social protection allows households
to increase and diversify their food
consumption, often through increased
own production. Positive impacts on child
and maternal welfare are enhanced when
programmes are gender-sensitive or targeted
at women. This is especially important

because maternal and child malnutrition
perpetuate poverty from generation to
generation.
Increased food consumption and greater
dietary diversity do not automatically improve
nutrition outcomes. Nutritional status
depends on a number of additional factors,
including access to clean water, sanitation
and health care, as well as appropriate childfeeding and adult dietary choices. Thus, for
social assistance programmes to improve
nutrition outcomes, they must be combined
with complementary interventions. Numerous
agricultural interventions, such as home
gardening and small livestock breeding, can
also contribute to improving nutrition.

BOX 24
The Social Protection Floor
The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
define a set of essential goods and
services, notably the right to an adequate
standard of living (including the right to
adequate food), the right to health, the
right to water, the right to education, the
right to housing and the right to social
security.
The Social Protection Floor (SPF)
initiative, developed under ILO and WHO
leadership, is an initiative intended to
ensure the realization of these rights.
The SPF comprises a basic set of social
guarantees for all and the gradual
implementation of higher standards as an
integrated set of social policies designed
to guarantee income security and access
to essential social services for all, paying
particular attention to vulnerable groups
and protecting and empowering people
across the life cycle (ILO, 2011).
The “rights-based” SPF is based on the
normative belief that social protection
should reflect a social contract between
governments and citizens, in contrast with
“instrumentalist” views that see social
protection primarily as a set of tools for
achieving poverty reduction and economic
growth (HLPE, 2012). Building on the
minimum standards for social security
established by the ILO, the SPF has two

main components: access to “essential
services” (such as water and sanitation,
nutrition, health and education), and
“essential social transfers” (in cash or kind,
to provide basic income security) (ILO and
WHO, 2009).
The Social Protection Floors
Recommendation adopted by the 2012
International Labour Conference states
that social protection floors should
include, as a minimum, the following
basic social security guarantees: essential
healthcare and basic income security for
children, older persons, and adults who
are disabled, unemployed or otherwise
unable to earn sufficient income.
The SPF initiative was supported
at the 2011 and 2012 G20 Summits.
In 2012, G20 leaders also agreed to
assist low-income countries in capacity
building for implementing national SPFs
through policy coherence, coordination,
cooperation and knowledge sharing. The
“Recommendation Concerning National
Floors of Social Protection”, which
provides guidance on the progressive
implementation of social protection floors
as a fundamental element of inclusive
national social security systems, was
adopted at the 2012 International Labour
Conference (EU, 2012).

81

82

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

BOX 25
Strengthening the enabling environment for coherent agricultural and social
protection interventions
Coherent agricultural and social
protection policies and programmes
imply coordinated efforts across
different government agencies;
however, government institutions are
not typically organized to readily allow
for cross-sectoral collaboration. Political,
institutional and operational factors often
pose barriers to effective joint action
across ministries of agriculture and social
protection. Political commitment, an
integrated policy framework, institutional
coordination arrangements, financing
arrangements and capacity for coherence
are five critical elements of an enabling
environment to strengthen collaboration
and coordination across these two spheres.
Technical and operational solutions
are necessary to establish coherence,
but insufficient for achieving it. Highlevel political commitment is critical in
generating consensus among different
stakeholders about the importance
and benefits of coherence and the
development of a shared vision. The
opportunity to establish political
commitment for coherence is influenced
by political context and political economy
factors, including actors’ motivations,
interests and values with regard to small
family farm development and social
protection.
An integrated policy framework provides
an opportunity for translating political
commitments for coherence into a longterm vision and formal strategies for action.
The process of developing an integrated
policy framework can bring together
diverse stakeholders – including the
government, development partners and
civil society organizations – to discuss issues;
establish consolidated policy narratives;
define common goals, sectoral objectives,
priorities, roles and responsibilities; and
create a plan of action in order to move
towards coherent policy and programming.
Institutional arrangements for
coordination are critical for coherence,

as they facilitate collaboration across
different agencies, ensuring that
policy and programme formulation is
properly harmonized and aligned, and
interventions are well implemented. These
coordination mechanisms are particularly
important when agricultural and social
protection interventions targeting small
family farmers are implemented by
different ministries, and when various
actors from the government, civil society
and development partners influence
processes related to these interventions.
Appropriately designed funding
arrangements can facilitate coordination
between the ministries of agriculture
and social protection. Collaboration can
be undermined by potential competition
for resources. Resource allocation and
financing arrangements can be used
strategically to mediate these challenges
and promote cross-sectoral collaboration.
Stakeholders need adequate capacity
to effectively pursue and manage
coherence between agriculture and social
protection. Achieving complementarities
and sequencing by running parallel
instruments is a challenge in many lowincome countries with limited institutional
capacities and scarce resources. A broad
set of technical and functional capacities
across line ministries and decentralized
government bodies is necessary to build
political commitment to coherence, set up
institutional frameworks, and drive the
agenda forward through efficient policy
and programme implementation.

Source: Gavrilovic et al., 2015.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

Social protection can promote
investment in productive activities
The livelihoods of most poor rural
households in the developing world are
still based on agriculture, and particularly
on subsistence agriculture. Many of these
farmers live in places where markets – for
agricultural inputs and outputs, labour,
and other goods and services such as credit
and insurance – are lacking or do not
function well. The uncertainties of weather,
particularly with accelerating climate change,
and the lack of affordable insurance are at
the heart of the vulnerabilities of households
dependent on agricultural livelihoods.
The time horizon of vulnerable agricultural
households is reduced because they focus
on survival. As a result, they often adopt
low risk, low-return, agricultural and other
income-generating strategies, and may seek
to obtain liquidity or diversify income sources
in casual labour markets. For similar reasons,
households may underinvest in the education
and health of their children, as well as
adopt negative risk-coping strategies such as
distress sales of assets, reducing the quantity
and quality of food consumption, begging or
taking children out of school.
This report argues that social protection
can positively impact the investment decisions
of poor households. Social protection helps
households manage risk. When provided
at regular and predictable intervals, it can
increase predictability and security for
agricultural households, partially substituting
for insurance and providing a crucial
source of liquidity. Social protection allows
households to renew or strengthen their
participation in informal social networks for
risk-sharing and reciprocal exchange. While
limited in effectiveness, such social protection
often provides initial help in the face of
shocks. Social protection thus helps relax
liquidity, credit and/or savings constraints.
A growing body of evidence described
in this report shows that social assistance
programmes not only prevent households
from falling into deeper poverty and hunger
when exposed to a shock; by helping the
poor overcome liquidity and credit constraints
and manage risks more effectively, they
also allow poor households to invest in
productive activities and build assets and

resources. The evidence shows that social
protection fosters more investment in the
education and health of children, and
reduces child labour, with implications for
future productivity and employability. When
well implemented, social protection can
also facilitate increased investment in farm
production activities as well as in non-farm
enterprises. Even relatively small transfers
help the poor overcome liquidity and credit
constraints and provide insurance against
some risks that deter them from pursuing
higher-return activities. The evidence is clear
that transfers also foster greater inclusiveness
by facilitating poor households’ participation
in, and contribution to, social networks,
which help households cope with risk and
play an important role in the social fabric of
communities.

Social protection does not reduce
work effort
Despite concerns that social protection
measures might reduce incentives for
recipients to work, the evidence shows this
is not the case. Rather, many beneficiaries
shift time previously dedicated to casual
agricultural wage employment of last
resort to own-farm or non-agricultural
employment. Taken together with the
increase in farm and non-farm production
activities, social protection strengthens
livelihoods, instead of fostering dependency.

Social protection has positive
impacts on local communities and
economies
Public works programmes can provide
important infrastructure and community
assets and, when designed and implemented
properly, directly contribute to the local
economy. Moreover, additional income
provided by social protection programmes
creates demand for locally produced goods
and services, contributing to a virtuous circle
of local economic growth. Complementary
programmes may be necessary to reduce
supply-side constraints, thus preventing price
rises and increasing the real-income and
production impacts of the programme.

83

84

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Programme design and
implementation, and household
characteristics determine
programme impacts
While targeting can be an effective
instrument for reducing poverty and
inequality, implementation is key and depends
largely on institutional capacity. Unified
registries have improved targeting, reduced
costs and facilitated coordination across
multiple programmes. The level, timing and
predictability of income transfers are central
to success: transfers must be adequate for the
programme objectives, as well as regular and
reliable. Gender, household characteristics and
the nature of the local economy also account
for differences in programme impacts. Effective
monitoring and evaluation are required to
help governments and donors design more
effective programmes and promote greater
accountability and public support.

Social protection and agriculture
must work together in combating
poverty and hunger
Notwithstanding its proven effectiveness, social
protection alone cannot sustainably move
people out of poverty and hunger, and will not
transform local economies by itself. Agriculture
and social protection are fundamentally linked
in the context of rural livelihoods. Poor and
food-insecure families depend primarily on
agriculture for their livelihoods, and make up
a large proportion of beneficiaries of social
protection programmes. Stronger coherence
between agriculture and social protection
interventions can assist in protecting the
welfare of poor, small-scale agriculturalists,
helping them manage risks more effectively
and achieve improved agricultural productivity,
leading to more sustainable livelihoods, and
gradually move out of poverty and hunger.
However, relatively few agricultural
interventions are coordinated or integrated
with social protection programmes.
Agricultural and social protection policies
originate from different disciplines, and are
still viewed as parallel policies implemented
by different authorities competing for
financial resources. Developing synergies is an
opportunity, but is also a necessity, because

of the difficult public expenditure trade-offs
implied by constrained government budgets.
This report argues not only that it is imperative
to help the poorest meet basic consumption
needs, especially when they are unable to
work, but such help is itself a foundation
for gradually improving the livelihoods of
the poor. Leveraging public expenditures on
agriculture and social protection programmes
in support of each other not only furthers this
transformation, but also serves to strengthen
agricultural and rural development.

A national vision is needed
Countries need a shared national vision of
how agriculture and social protection can
work together to gradually move people out
of poverty and hunger if they are to adopt
the necessary institutional and operational
measures. Policy and planning frameworks
for rural development, poverty reduction,
food security and nutrition need to articulate
the roles of agriculture and social protection
in achieving these results, together with a
broader set of interventions.
The type of complementary interventions
to be coordinated or bundled with social
assistance must depend on the context and
the key constraints, but must also consider
issues such as implementation capacities and
available resources. In all cases, interventions
must be designed to address a range of
constraints to allow the poorest to transform
their livelihood strategies to escape and
remain out of poverty. For instance, human
capacity development through investment
in education and training in rural areas
can provide farmers with the abilities
and skills needed to participate in more
commercially oriented activities. Participating
in commercial activities also requires
secure tenure rights, savings and access to
financial services. Cross-sectoral coordination
mechanisms at national and subnational
levels for food security and nutrition
and rural development need to engage
relevant actors in the agricultural and social
protection domains in joint programming.
Single registries can also play a key role in
coordinating interventions across different
sectors and in providing households with the
complementary support needed to gradually
move themselves out of poverty and hunger.

Social protec tion and agriculture: breaking the c ycle of rur al povert y

Key messages of the report
• Social protection programmes reduce
poverty and food insecurity. Effective
targeting and adequate transfers are
important determinants of success.
Social protection contributes to higher
incomes and food security not only by
ensuring increases in consumption, but by
enhancing a household’s ability to produce
food and augment income.
• Programmes targeted at women have
stronger food security and nutrition
impacts. Programmes that are gendersensitive, reduce women’s time constraints
and strengthen their control over income
enhance maternal and child welfare. This
is especially important because maternal
and child malnutrition perpetuate poverty
from generation to generation.
• Social protection stimulates investment
in agricultural production and other
economic activities. Social protection
enhances nutrition, health and education,
with implications for future productivity,
employability, incomes and well-being.
Social protection programmes that provide
regular and predictable transfers promote
savings and investment in both farm
and off-farm activities, and encourage
households to engage in more ambitious
activities offering higher returns.
• Social protection does not reduce work
effort. But it does give beneficiaries greater
choice, and many shift time previously
dedicated to casual agricultural wage
employment of last resort to own-farm
work or non-agricultural employment.
Taken together with the increase in farm
and non-farm production activities, social
protection strengthens livelihoods instead
of fostering dependency.
• Social protection has virtuous impacts on
local communities and economies. Public
works programmes can provide important
infrastructure and community assets
and, when designed and implemented
properly, contribute directly to the
local economy. Cash transfers increase
the purchasing power of beneficiary
households, who demand goods and
services, many of which are produced or
provided in the local economy by nonbeneficiary households. Complementary
programmes may be necessary to reduce

production constraints to prevent inflation
and maximize the real-income and
production impacts of the programme.
• Social protection, by itself, is not enough
to move people out of poverty. As
poor households typically face multiple
constraints and risks, joint, coordinated and/
or aligned social protection and agricultural
programmes are likely to be more effective
in helping poor households move out of
poverty in a sustainable manner.
• There are clear opportunities to leverage
social protection and agriculture
programmes to further rural development.
Developing synergies is an opportunity
and also a necessity because of constrained
government budgets. It is imperative to
help the poorest meet basic consumption
needs, especially when they are unable
to work. Such help can itself become a
foundation for gradual improvement of
the livelihoods of the poor. Given that the
majority of the rural poor depend largely
on agriculture, agricultural interventions
are needed to overcome structural
supply-side bottlenecks holding back
growth. Leveraging public expenditures
on agriculture and social protection
programmes in support of each other not
only furthers this transformation, but also
serves to strengthen agricultural and rural
development.
• A national vision is needed of how
agriculture and social protection can
gradually move people out of poverty and
hunger. National vision and commitment,
supported by permanent domestic resource
mobilization, must support coordinated
action at the national and subnational
levels. Policy and planning frameworks for
rural development, poverty reduction, food
security and nutrition need to articulate
the role of agriculture and social protection
in moving people out of poverty and
hunger, together with a broader set of
interventions. The type of agricultural
interventions combined with social
assistance depends on the context and
constraints, but must also consider issues
such as local implementation capacities
and available resources. In all cases,
interventions must be designed to address
a range of constraints to allow the poorest
to transform their livelihood strategies to
escape and remain out of poverty.

85

Statistical annex

Statistic al annex

Notes on the annex tables

Key
The following conventions are used in the tables:
.. = data not available
0 or 0.0 = nil or negligible
blank cell = not applicable
Numbers presented in the tables may differ from the original data
sources because of rounding or data processing. To separate decimals
from whole numbers a full point (.) is used.

Technical notes
Table A1. Poverty headcount ratios and underweight
prevalence among children
Source: World Bank, 2015a (columns 1 and 2); UNICEF, 2014 (columns 3–6).
Note: Estimates of poverty rates for Argentina and the Federated
States of Micronesia are based on urban data only.
Share of population living on less than $1.25 a day

Percentage of the population living on less than $1.25 a day measured
in constant 2005 PPP dollars. This is sometimes referred to as extreme
poverty.
Share of population living on less than $2.00 a day

Percentage of the population living on less than $2.00 a day measured
in constant 2005 PPP dollars.
Share of children underweight

Percentage of children aged 0–59 months who are below minus two
standard deviations from the median weight-for-age according to the
WHO Child Growth Standards.

Table A2. Agriculture’s importance in the economy and
labour force, fertilizer use intensity, farm size and women’s
involvement in agriculture
Sources: World Bank, 2015c (column 1); FAO, 2015a (columns 2, 3, 8
and 9); FAO, 2001 and FAO, 2013a (columns 4–7).
Share of value added from agriculture

Net output of the agriculture sector in 2012, after adding up
all outputs and subtracting intermediate inputs expressed as a
percentage of GDP. The agriculture sector includes forestry, hunting
and fishing, as well as cultivation of crops and livestock production.

89

90

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

Share of total labour force in agriculture

Share of the labour force in 2014 who were engaged in or seeking
work in agriculture, hunting, fishing or forestry. The labour force is
another term for the economically active population, which includes
employed and unemployed people (including those seeking work for
the first time). The term covers employers; self-employed workers;
salaried employees; wage earners; unpaid workers assisting in a family,
farm or business operation; members of producer cooperatives and
members of the armed forces.
Fertilizer use intensity

Average kilograms of fertilizer nutrients (considering nitrogen,
phosphate and potash fertilizers) per hectare of arable and permanent
cropland for the period 2010–12. Fertilizer use intensity is reported for
the former Sudan (see Country notes), and the data refer to fertilizer
use and land area in Sudan (former) for the year 2010 only.
Share of holdings by farm size class

The share of agricultural holdings are shown for each land size class;
these are the authors’ compilation using the most recent data from
the FAO Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 1990 or
2000 round, as shown in FAO (2001) and FAO (2013a). The agricultural
holdings reported by agricultural censuses include crop and livestock
production only; holdings engaged in forestry or fisheries are only
included if they also are engaged in crop and livestock production.
An agricultural holding is an economic unit of agricultural production
under single management comprising all livestock kept and all land
used wholly or partly for agricultural production purposes, without
regard to title, legal form, or size. Single management may be
exercised by an individual or a household, jointly by two or more
individuals or households, by a clan or tribe, or by a juridical person
such as a corporation or a government agency. The holding’s land may
consist of one or more parcels, located in one or more separate areas
or in one or more territorial or administrative divisions, provided the
parcels share the same production means utilized by the holding, such
as labour, farm building, machinery or draught animals.
Share of agricultural labour force that is female

The share of the economically active population in agriculture in 2014
who were women.
Share of female labour force in agriculture

The share of the economically active women in 2014 who were active
in agriculture.

Table A3. Social assistance coverage, by population group
Source: World Bank, 2015e.
Share of population covered by social assistance

The share of individuals in a population living in a household in which
at least one member of the household receives benefits from a social
assistance programme. Social assistance may include the following
types of programme: conditional and unconditional cash transfers,
family/child allowances, in-kind transfers, public works or cash-for-work
programmes, school feeding, social pensions and other types of social

Statistic al annex

assistance. Cross-country comparability is limited as the availability of
information on programmes varies from country to country.

Table A4. Social assistance transfer amounts, by population
group, and benefit incidence
Source: World Bank, 2015e.
Average daily transfer of social assistance per beneficiary

Refers to the total social assistance transfers received on a daily basis
by households divided by average household size and measured in
2005 PPP dollars. Social assistance is defined in Table A3. However,
comparability between Tables A3 and A4 is limited. For some
countries, information was available on coverage and is reported
in Table A3, but no information was provided on transfer amounts
and so no estimates are provided in Table A4. Furthermore, for
many countries, the types and number of programmes included in
the coverage (Table A3) are different from the types and number of
programmes reporting transfer amounts (Table A4).

Regional and income groupings and aggregates
Countries are listed in alphabetical order according to the income and
regional groupings established by the World Bank country classification
system; see World Bank (2015c) for a description. All regional and other
averages are weighted averages; they are presented whenever available
data allow such calculations to be made.

Country notes
Data for China, mainland, do not include data for Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region of China and Macao Special Administrative
Region of China. Data for Sudan and South Sudan are presented
where available; otherwise, estimates are shown for Sudan (former).

91

92

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

TABLE A1
Poverty headcount ratios and underweight prevalence among children
Share of population
living on:
less than
$1.25/day

less than
$2.00/day

Share of children underweight
By residence
Rural

(Percentage)

LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES

East Asia and the Pacific
American Samoa
Cambodia
China, mainland
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati

By household income
quintile

Urban

(Percentage)

Poorest

Richest

(Percentage)

17.0

36.2

7.9

22.7

..

..

..

..

..

..

10.1

41.3

30.6

19.8

35.4

15.9

6.3

18.6

4.4

1.3

..

..

..

..

26.7

13.2

..

..

3.3

16.4

5.4

5.0

..

..

16.2

43.3

23.0

16.9

27.8

13.9

..

..

..

..

17.6

7.9

31.2

63.2

28.9

16.3

36.5

12.1

Malaysia

..

0.8

..

..

..

..

Marshall Islands

..

..

..

..

..

..

17.5

26.7

..

..

..

..

Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Micronesia (Federated States of)
Mongolia

..

..

7.3

2.8

5.0

0.9

Myanmar

..

..

24.2

18.7

33.1

13.5

Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines

..

..

..

..

..

..

7.3

22.0

29.0

19.9

..

..

18.6

41.4

23.7

16.4

..

..

Samoa

..

..

..

..

..

..

Solomon Islands

..

..

12.2

8.2

13.7

9.8

Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga

0.3

3.3

10.4

7.1

13.5

3.7

33.2

69.6

48.0

35.4

49.4

35.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

Tuvalu

..

..

3.0

3.6

0.7

0.0

Vanuatu

..

..

11.6

12.0

12.2

10.3

Viet Nam

5.0

22.4

15.3

6.6

20.6

3.1

Europe and Central Asia

0.5

2.2

Albania

0.3

2.0

7.1

5.0

7.9

3.6

Armenia

2.5

17.6

8.0

3.3

7.9

1.5

Azerbaijan

0.3

1.9

12.0

4.7

15.4

2.2

..

..

1.7

1.1

2.4

0.4

0.0

0.1

1.4

1.9

0.9

3.9

Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria

1.9

3.9

1.1

1.8

..

..

Georgia

16.1

33.5

1.4

0.9

3.0

1.0

Kazakhstan

0.0

0.5

3.3

4.0

4.1

3.5

Kyrgyzstan

5.1

21.1

3.7

3.7

4.5

3.3

Latvia

1.1

2.0

..

..

..

..

Statistic al annex

93

TABLE A1 (cont.)
Share of population
living on:
less than
$1.25/day

less than
$2.00/day

Share of children underweight
By residence
Rural

(Percentage)

By household income
quintile

Urban

(Percentage)

Poorest

Richest

(Percentage)

Lithuania

0.8

1.2

..

..

..

..

Montenegro

0.2

0.7

1.9

2.4

3.8

0.9
0.7

Republic of Moldova

0.2

2.8

3.8

1.9

5.5

Romania

0.0

1.6

4.0

3.0

..

..

Russian Federation

0.0

0.2

..

..

..

..

Serbia

0.1

0.4

1.3

1.8

3.0

2.1

Tajikistan

6.0

25.1

13.7

12.1

15.8

9.3

The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

0.2

3.6

1.8

0.8

1.9

0.0

Turkey

0.1

2.6

2.7

1.3

4.2

0.5

Turkmenistan

5.7

21.3

..

..

..

..

Ukraine

..

..

5.4

3.5

..

..

Uzbekistan

..

..

4.3

4.7

4.5

3.1

4.6

9.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Belize

1.4

2.9

..

..

..

..

11.3

20.0

6.6

5.4

8.8

3.0

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

7.0

12.0

6.4

2.8

7.5

2.0

Brazil

4.5

8.2

2.0

2.2

2.2

1.8

Chile

0.8

1.9

..

..

..

..

Colombia

5.0

11.3

4.6

2.9

5.6

1.8

Costa Rica

1.4

3.2

2.0

1.2

..

..

Cuba

..

..

..

..

..

..

Dominica

..

..

..

..

..

..

2.5

8.5

3.8

3.2

5.3

1.2

Dominican Republic
Ecuador

4.0

9.0

8.2

4.7

..

..

El Salvador

2.8

10.3

8.5

4.4

11.6

0.9

Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana

..

..

..

..

..

..

13.7

29.8

15.7

8.3

20.8

3.2

5.3

11.9

12.2

7.5

15.7

4.1

Haiti

51.6

69.5

13.1

8.6

17.8

3.8

Honduras

16.5

29.2

9.0

4.7

12.8

3.1

Jamaica

0.0

1.9

2.5

5.1

..

..

Mexico

1.1

4.5

4.6

2.2

..

..

Nicaragua

6.8

16.0

6.9

4.2

8.6

1.3

Panama

3.6

8.4

3.2

2.4

..

..

Paraguay

4.4

11.0

..

..

..

..
0.6

Peru
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

3.0

8.7

5.9

2.1

7.3

11.8

25.8

3.0

1.8

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

94

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

TABLE A1 (cont.)
Share of population
living on:
less than
$1.25/day

less than
$2.00/day

Share of children underweight
By residence
Rural

(Percentage)

By household income
quintile

Urban

(Percentage)

Poorest

Richest

(Percentage)

Suriname

10.5

19.8

6.1

5.6

6.2

4.2

Uruguay

0.3

1.2

..

..

..

..

Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

5.6

10.7

..

..

..

..

Middle East and North Africa

1.7

11.6

Algeria

1.2

8.2

4.3

3.2

4.5

1.8

Djibouti

10.2

27.8

39.6

26.0

..

..
5.4

Egypt

1.7

15.3

6.7

6.9

7.5

Iran (Islamic Republic of)

0.8

4.6

..

..

..

..

Iraq

3.7

20.9

8.5

8.4

9.1

8.2

Jordan

0.1

1.0

2.1

3.2

5.2

0.4

..

..

..

..

..

..

Lebanon
Libya

..

..

..

..

..

..

Morocco

1.8

11.0

4.3

1.7

6.7

1.1

Occupied Palestinian Territory

0.1

0.5

3.9

3.7

4.6

2.9

Syrian Arab Republic

0.4

8.3

10.7

9.6

10.0

6.9

Tunisia

0.7

4.3

2.4

2.3

3.2

2.2

Yemen

4.8

25.7

38.2

27.9

..

..

24.5

60.2

South Asia
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives

..

..

..

..

..

..

39.6

73.9

39.2

28.3

50.3

20.9

3.0

17.1

13.8

10.4

16.1

7.3

24.7

60.6

46.6

33.9

56.6

19.7

0.0

2.3

20.1

12.1

24.3

10.5

Nepal

25.4

58.0

30.3

16.8

40.3

10.0

Pakistan

12.7

50.7

34.6

24.7

47.8

15.6

Sri Lanka

2.8

19.9

27.1

18.0

33.4

17.9

46.9

68.8

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola

43.0

67.0

18.0

14.1

..

..

Benin

51.6

74.3

22.4

15.9

25.0

10.0

Botswana

10.0

23.2

11.3

10.1

15.7

3.9

Burkina Faso

40.8

69.3

27.7

19.1

31.7

15.5

Burundi

79.8

92.9

30.1

18.7

40.7

17.0

Cabo Verde

11.9

31.9

..

..

..

..

Cameroon

24.9

50.1

20.8

7.5

29.8

3.9

Central African Republic

56.7

75.5

23.6

23.2

26.0

19.0

Chad

36.5

60.6

32.9

21.7

33.2

21.1

Statistic al annex

95

TABLE A1 (cont.)
Share of population
living on:
less than
$1.25/day

less than
$2.00/day

Share of children underweight
By residence
Rural

(Percentage)

By household income
quintile

Urban

(Percentage)

Poorest

Richest

(Percentage)

Comoros

48.2

66.9

18.1

13.7

19.8

9.3

Congo

32.8

57.3

15.8

9.1

17.6

4.8

Côte d’Ivoire

37.3

61.6

17.7

12.3

20.7

10.0

Democratic Republic of the Congo

84.0

93.5

26.8

16.9

28.8

12.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

36.8

72.2

30.9

16.9

35.6

15.1

5.4

19.4

9.0

6.0

10.4

1.9

Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia

34.0

56.4

21.4

11.9

23.5

9.5

Ghana

18.0

37.3

15.5

10.5

20.0

6.3

Guinea

41.3

71.9

21.5

10.6

19.8

4.8

Guinea-Bissau

48.7

77.8

20.7

13.2

22.1

10.6

Kenya

38.0

62.0

17.6

10.9

24.9

8.8

Lesotho

45.7

63.7

13.6

13.1

17.8

9.2

Liberia

70.2

..

21.3

18.3

21.0

13.0

Madagascar

87.8

95.2

38.1

31.1

40.4

24.0

Malawi

71.6

..

14.3

11.1

16.5

12.8

Mali

50.8

78.9

30.7

20.6

31.0

17.0

Mauritania

23.5

47.8

29.7

16.4

36.4

9.7

0.4

1.8

..

..

..

..

55.8

79.2

17.5

10.5

23.0

6.4

Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia

22.0

41.6

19.8

12.8

21.5

6.9

Niger

40.8

76.1

39.7

25.4

14.3

26.2
15.6

Nigeria

60.1

80.9

34.5

24.7

41.9

Rwanda

63.0

82.3

12.4

6.2

15.5

5.2

Sao Tome and Principe

42.2

72.0

15.4

13.7

17.8

6.8

Senegal

34.1

60.3

19.1

12.2

20.8

9.6

0.2

1.3

..

..

..

..

56.6

82.5

21.8

19.3

21.5

14.9

..

..

39.5

21.1

42.0

13.9

9.4

26.2

11.4

11.7

..

..

Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan

..

..

29.1

22.8

32.1

20.5

Sudan

..

..

35.4

32.7

40.0

16.5

Sudan, former

17.2

40.2

..

..

..

..

Swaziland

39.8

59.6

6.2

4.2

8.4

3.6

Togo

52.5

72.8

19.4

10.3

21.0

8.8

Uganda

37.0

63.1

15.2

6.9

18.1

8.4

United Republic of Tanzania

43.5

73.0

14.6

9.2

21.5

9.3

Zambia

73.2

..

15.7

13.0

15.7

10.7

..

..

10.7

8.4

12.0

5.7

Zimbabwe

96

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

TABLE A2
Agriculture’s importance in the economy and labour force, fertilizer use intensity, farm size and women’s
involvement in agriculture

WORLD

Share
Share of
of value
total labour
added from
force in
agriculture agriculture

Fertilizer
use
intensity

(Percentage)

(kg/ha)

Share of holdings
by farm size class
<1 ha

1–2 ha 2–5 ha

>5 ha

(Percentage)

Share of
agricultural
labour force
that is female

Share of
female labour
force in
agriculture

(Percentage)

3.6

38.3

124.0

72.0

12.4

9.6

6.1

39.3

40.2

LOW- AND MIDDLEINCOME COUNTRIES

10.1

45.2

126.0

73.8

12.1

9.3

4.7

40.5

48.1

East Asia and the Pacific

10.8

54.4

321.5

87.0

7.4

4.4

1.3

46.7

57.0

American Samoa

..

26.1

..

57.3

26.3

13.1

3.3

33.3

22.2

Cambodia

35.6

64.2

14.0

..

..

..

..

51.0

67.9

China, mainland

10.1

58.7

520.9

93.0

4.9

1.7

0.4

45.5

61.7

..

20.9

..

..

..

..

..

46.5

21.0

Fiji

12.0

34.7

23.5

43.3

11.8

19.6

25.3

21.9

23.1

Indonesia

14.5

38.7

99.6

70.8

16.8

11.0

1.4

39.4

41.7

Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

Kiribati

..

21.2

..

..

..

..

..

27.3

13.6

Lao People’s Democratic
Republic

28.1

74.2

..

38.3

35.2

26.5

..

52.0

77.1

Malaysia

10.0

10.7

253.7

..

..

..

..

20.6

5.7

Marshall Islands

..

23.1

0.0

..

..

..

..

16.7

9.1

Micronesia (Federated
States of)

..

21.2

..

..

..

..

..

27.3

13.6

Mongolia

16.3

15.7

22.0

..

..

..

..

48.3

15.1

Myanmar

..

65.7

11.0

33.7

23.3

29.9

13.2

48.6

68.4

5.2

18.2

..

..

..

..

..

50.0

25.0

..

66.8

29.9

..

..

..

..

55.8

76.4

11.8

31.4

66.6

40.1

28.0

23.5

8.4

24.3

19.2

Samoa

..

24.7

0.4

19.0

31.9

30.0

19.2

33.3

24.0

Solomon Islands

..

66.5

..

..

..

..

..

47.8

80.2

Thailand

12.3

45.4

123.5

19.7

22.5

37.2

20.5

44.6

43.4

Timor-Leste

18.4

78.8

..

..

..

..

..

45.2

86.8

Tonga

19.2

25.6

142.8

..

..

..

..

36.4

21.1

Tuvalu

25.4

25.0

..

..

..

..

..

0.0

0.0

Vanuatu

28.0

27.9

..

..

..

..

..

46.2

27.3

Viet Nam

19.7

61.4

196.7

84.9

9.9

4.7

0.5

48.8

62.0

6.6

12.9

39.8

44.3

17.0

22.6

16.1

39.2

57.0

Albania

21.8

39.2

80.3

59.9

30.1

10.0

..

41.7

38.7

Armenia

21.6

9.0

25.3

..

..

..

..

12.1

2.4

Azerbaijan

5.5

21.2

12.9

..

..

..

..

52.5

23.8

Belarus

9.8

7.6

274.7

..

..

..

..

16.4

2.5

Bosnia and Herzegovina

7.7

1.7

85.0

..

..

..

..

59.4

2.1

Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines

Europe and Central Asia

Statistic al annex

97

TABLE A2 (cont.)
Share
Share of
of value
total labour
added from
force in
agriculture agriculture

Fertilizer
use
intensity

(Percentage)

(kg/ha)

Share of holdings
by farm size class
<1 ha

1–2 ha 2–5 ha

>5 ha

(Percentage)

Share of
agricultural
labour force
that is female

Share of
female labour
force in
agriculture

(Percentage)

Bulgaria

5.4

2.9

111.9

77.0

..

19.8

3.2

27.2

1.7

Georgia

8.6

13.5

23.6

70.2

23.0

5.2

1.6

34.4

10.0

Kazakhstan

4.7

12.8

1.7

..

..

..

..

22.2

5.8

Kyrgyzstan

19.2

19.0

20.6

85.3

6.9

5.0

2.8

28.3

12.7

..

8.3

83.2

0.0

6.1

19.8

74.1

23.2

3.9

Latvia
Lithuania
Montenegro
Republic of Moldova

..

6.7

89.7

0.2

7.8

47.1

44.9

21.4

2.8

8.8

10.6

12.0

..

..

..

..

37.5

8.8

13.4

12.6

12.4

..

..

..

..

27.4

6.5

Romania

6.0

7.5

49.7

49.5

20.0

22.9

7.5

40.9

6.7

Russian Federation

3.9

7.3

16.0

..

..

..

..

22.7

3.3

Serbia

9.0

10.7

127.9

27.5

18.7

31.3

22.4

36.5

8.6

Tajikistan

26.6

25.0

49.7

..

..

..

..

52.1

28.5

The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

10.4

6.0

57.7

..

..

..

..

29.8

4.6

9.0

29.6

89.1

17.0

17.5

30.9

34.6

55.2

62.3

14.5

28.3

..

..

..

..

..

53.5

32.0

Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine

9.3

9.1

36.6

..

..

..

..

25.1

4.6

18.9

19.2

173.9

..

..

..

..

42.5

17.8

Latin America and
the Caribbean

5.2

13.5

110.9

17.2

9.0

25.3

48.5

21.1

6.7

Antigua and Barbuda

2.2

20.0

2.9

..

..

..

..

25.0

11.8

Argentina

6.9

6.9

40.7

..

..

15.1

84.9

10.8

1.8

Belize

15.0

23.0

8.6

..

..

..

..

2.9

1.8

Bolivia (Plurinational
State of)

13.0

40.0

158.2

..

..

..

..

41.7

36.4

Uzbekistan

Brazil

5.3

9.4

71.6

10.6

9.7

16.5

63.2

24.4

5.1

Chile

3.4

12.4

318.5

14.6

10.2

17.7

57.5

15.1

4.9

Colombia

6.3

13.2

332.1

18.1

13.5

21.2

47.2

25.2

7.1

Costa Rica

6.1

13.7

264.8

..

..

..

..

13.8

5.3

..

10.3

34.7

..

..

..

..

19.3

5.0

16.9

18.8

17.0

53.2

21.3

18.3

7.2

33.3

15.4

Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic

6.3

9.0

59.1

..

..

..

..

35.0

7.0

Ecuador

9.1

16.6

117.9

29.5

14.0

20.1

36.5

26.1

10.5

11.9

20.9

135.4

..

..

..

..

9.7

4.9

El Salvador
Grenada

5.6

19.1

..

85.0

7.5

5.4

2.2

22.2

10.5

Guatemala

11.2

36.8

97.8

78.5

10.4

6.0

5.1

9.6

9.1

Guyana

21.5

13.5

28.9

..

..

..

..

7.8

2.9

..

56.6

..

..

..

..

..

23.8

41.4

14.8

21.2

58.2

..

..

54.7

45.3

21.2

14.3

..

16.2

39.7

69.4

15.2

11.9

3.5

27.7

10.2

Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica

98

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

TABLE A2 (cont.)

Mexico

Share
Share of
of value
total labour
added from
force in
agriculture agriculture

Fertilizer
use
intensity

(Percentage)

(kg/ha)

Share of holdings
by farm size class
<1 ha

1–2 ha 2–5 ha

>5 ha

(Percentage)

Share of
agricultural
labour force
that is female

Share of
female labour
force in
agriculture

(Percentage)

3.5

14.3

73.2

..

..

..

..

12.7

4.7

18.3

12.6

39.0

12.4

9.2

18.6

59.7

7.7

3.0

3.5

14.0

50.0

52.7

10.3

11.6

25.4

3.2

1.2

18.1

23.5

86.0

9.7

10.1

20.1

60.0

7.2

3.7

..

22.6

74.0

..

..

69.6

30.4

31.9

16.1

Saint Lucia

2.9

20.0

42.6

62.8

18.0

14.8

4.5

22.2

10.8

Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines

7.2

20.0

..

72.8

14.9

9.6

2.6

27.3

13.0

Suriname

7.1

16.1

138.2

..

..

..

..

24.2

10.5

Uruguay

10.2

10.8

177.6

..

..

11.0

89.0

14.8

3.5

..

4.5

134.6

8.5

14.1

25.7

51.6

6.4

0.7

11.2

19.5

58.5

59.0

11.4

13.8

15.8

47.6

33.0

9.3

19.7

17.4

21.8

12.6

23.4

42.2

52.5

28.6

..

72.3

..

..

..

..

..

46.3

76.9

14.5

22.6

454.9

87.1

8.0

3.8

1.1

40.8

35.3

..

20.0

31.7

47.5

12.1

18.4

22.1

50.2

31.6

Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru

Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

Middle East and
North Africa
Algeria
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Iraq

..

4.4

43.8

..

..

..

..

52.9

12.7

Jordan

3.1

5.4

632.2

53.7

32.5

7.4

6.4

65.3

19.4

Lebanon

6.1

1.4

174.8

72.7

14.1

10.0

3.2

30.8

1.7

Libya
Morocco
Occupied Palestinian
Territory
Syrian Arab Republic

..

2.4

24.6

14.4

10.1

25.0

50.6

74.1

6.5

14.4

22.8

32.6

25.4

18.2

27.5

28.9

49.7

46.2

5.3

6.7

..

..

..

..

..

74.8

19.3

..

18.4

30.8

..

..

..

..

63.8

53.3

Tunisia

9.2

19.3

26.7

..

..

..

..

32.4

21.8

Yemen

..

34.7

11.3

73.4

10.5

9.1

7.0

40.6

54.7

South Asia

18.1

50.5

157.9

61.8

19.0

14.4

4.7

35.0

58.8

Afghanistan

24.6

58.4

5.0

..

..

..

..

34.3

81.4

Bangladesh

17.1

41.6

229.6

..

..

..

..

52.7

53.8

Bhutan

17.0

92.7

11.3

..

..

..

..

34.4

98.3

India

17.5

52.5

161.3

62.9

18.9

13.9

4.3

32.5

59.0

Maldives

4.2

12.5

63.9

..

..

..

..

40.9

11.8

Nepal

36.5

92.9

27.2

74.9

17.5

6.8

0.8

50.1

97.7

Pakistan

24.5

37.1

175.9

36.1

21.5

28.1

14.3

31.9

53.5

Sri Lanka

11.0

41.3

128.1

..

..

..

..

37.9

39.8

Sub-Saharan Africa

15.7

56.5

14.9

61.8

21.5

12.7

4.1

48.9

60.1

7.2

68.2

8.3

..

..

..

..

55.6

79.4

Angola

Statistic al annex

99

TABLE A2 (cont.)

Benin

Share
Share of
of value
total labour
added from
force in
agriculture agriculture

Fertilizer
use
intensity

(Percentage)

(kg/ha)

Share of holdings
by farm size class
<1 ha

1–2 ha 2–5 ha

>5 ha

(Percentage)

Share of
agricultural
labour force
that is female

Share of
female labour
force in
agriculture

(Percentage)

36.0

40.5

9.9

..

..

..

..

40.1

38.6

2.9

41.3

53.2

..

..

..

..

57.5

55.0

Burkina Faso

35.3

92.0

10.2

12.9

19.5

41.2

26.4

48.2

93.2

Burundi

Botswana

40.6

88.5

3.7

..

..

..

..

55.8

97.2

Cabo Verde

8.1

15.0

..

..

..

..

..

40.0

14.3

Cameroon

23.2

42.6

8.1

..

..

..

..

46.6

47.0

Central African Republic

54.3

59.1

..

..

..

..

..

49.6

65.7

Chad

55.8

61.0

..

..

..

..

..

57.6

71.8

Comoros

38.2

67.7

..

..

..

..

..

52.2

80.4

Congo

3.9

28.9

4.9

..

..

..

..

55.2

39.5

Côte d’Ivoire

22.5

33.8

10.1

42.1

14.2

19.3

24.4

35.6

39.4

Democratic Republic
of the Congo

21.8

55.3

1.1

86.7

10.4

2.9

..

49.0

70.7

..

72.3

0.9

..

..

..

..

42.9

77.1

48.0

75.1

20.6

62.9

24.3

11.9

1.0

45.0

70.3

4.0

23.8

6.7

..

..

..

..

49.0

26.7

Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia

..

74.6

7.9

..

..

..

..

54.4

85.5

Ghana

23.0

53.4

14.2

..

..

..

..

45.2

48.2

Guinea

20.5

78.0

2.3

34.1

31.0

28.0

6.8

50.3

82.2

Guinea-Bissau

48.3

77.9

..

70.2

17.6

10.1

2.1

45.9

94.0

Kenya

29.2

68.5

36.5

..

..

..

..

48.5

71.1

Lesotho

8.3

37.7

..

46.8

29.2

20.4

3.5

64.8

48.7

Liberia

38.8

59.6

..

..

..

..

..

43.7

64.9

Madagascar

28.2

68.0

2.2

..

..

..

..

53.3

73.3

Malawi

28.7

77.2

33.8

77.7

17.3

5.0

..

59.7

93.6

Mali

42.3

72.2

22.1

..

..

..

..

36.1

69.3

Mauritania

15.7

49.4

..

..

..

..

..

56.0

62.6

Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia

3.5

7.1

199.5

..

..

..

..

25.0

4.7

28.9

79.5

6.8

53.8

30.4

14.0

1.8

65.2

93.5

8.7

30.7

5.7

14.4

24.5

48.9

12.2

43.5

28.1

Niger

39.4

81.6

0.8

..

..

..

..

36.8

97.0

Nigeria

22.1

22.0

4.3

..

..

..

..

41.2

23.9

Rwanda

33.4

88.7

1.2

..

..

..

..

56.8

95.8

..

54.9

..

..

..

..

..

51.3

66.7

16.7

68.9

7.8

20.9

16.5

32.5

30.0

48.5

75.0

2.1

71.1

21.1

..

..

..

..

50.0

76.2

56.7

57.6

..

..

..

..

..

61.8

70.7

..

63.6

..

..

..

..

..

45.9

74.0

Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa

2.5

5.6

56.7

..

..

..

..

29.5

3.5

South Sudan

..

47.6

..

..

..

..

..

40.9

60.2

100

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

TABLE A2 (cont.)

Sudan
Sudan (former)
Swaziland
Togo

Share
Share of
of value
total labour
added from
force in
agriculture agriculture

Fertilizer
use
intensity

(Percentage)

(kg/ha)

Share of holdings
by farm size class
<1 ha

1–2 ha 2–5 ha

>5 ha

(Percentage)

Share of
agricultural
labour force
that is female

Share of
female labour
force in
agriculture

(Percentage)

..

47.6

..

..

..

..

..

40.8

60.2

28.7

..

3.6

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

26.2

..

..

..

..

..

51.8

27.8

..

50.9

7.4

..

..

..

..

42.4

56.3

Uganda

25.9

72.4

1.3

49.2

24.2

17.4

9.2

49.3

74.6

United Republic
of Tanzania

28.7

73.8

5.4

..

..

..

..

55.1

82.2

Zambia

10.3

60.7

30.6

..

..

..

..

46.2

64.3

Zimbabwe

13.2

53.7

30.1

..

..

..

..

51.9

65.1

1.4

2.7

117.6

32.6

17.5

16.0

33.9

34.4

2.1

HIGH-INCOME
COUNTRIES
Andorra

..

5.3

..

..

..

..

..

50.0

6.3

Aruba

..

20.0

..

..

..

..

..

22.2

10.5

Australia

2.4

3.7

45.0

..

..

..

..

47.9

3.8

Austria

1.5

2.8

100.2

..

14.6

21.8

63.6

45.2

2.7

Bahamas

2.3

1.9

..

36.3

24.8

20.5

18.4

0.0

0.0

Bahrain

..

0.5

424.4

..

..

..

..

0.0

0.0

Barbados

1.5

2.3

124.0

95.0

2.8

1.1

1.1

50.0

2.5

Belgium

0.8

1.1

278.7

..

17.2

13.6

69.2

32.1

0.8

Bermuda

0.8

0.0

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.0

Brunei Darussalam

0.7

0.0

101.8

..

..

..

..

..

0.0

..

1.5

66.5

..

2.5

3.3

94.2

56.6

1.8

Canada
Cayman Islands

..

19.2

..

..

..

..

..

20.0

9.1

China, Hong Kong SAR

0.1

0.2

682.8

..

..

..

..

49.3

0.1

China, Macao SAR

0.0

0.0

..

..

..

..

..

47.9

0.0

Croatia

4.5

3.3

282.9

50.6

16.0

19.1

14.3

27.4

2.0

Cyprus

..

4.4

137.8

54.8

16.7

16.0

12.5

38.5

3.8

Czech Republic

2.6

5.5

98.4

29.0

15.4

17.2

38.4

21.1

2.6

Denmark

1.8

2.2

112.8

..

1.7

1.8

96.5

24.6

1.1

Equatorial Guinea
Estonia
Faroe Islands

..

62.2

..

..

..

..

..

42.9

85.4

4.1

8.1

72.8

19.5

20.4

24.0

36.0

24.1

3.9

..

3.8

..

..

..

..

..

0.0

0.0

Finland

2.6

3.0

154.2

..

3.4

7.1

89.5

35.4

2.2

France

1.9

1.7

133.7

..

16.8

12.3

70.9

33.1

1.2

..

24.0

28.2

77.0

11.8

6.2

5.0

36.7

22.4

French Polynesia
Germany

0.9

1.3

195.2

..

8.0

16.9

75.1

35.4

1.0

Greece

3.7

10.4

79.2

..

49.0

27.7

23.2

53.6

13.3

..

0.0

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.0

..

21.4

..

30.1

15.7

27.5

26.8

27.8

14.3

4.5

6.5

87.9

27.0

13.3

19.2

40.6

20.9

3.0

Greenland
Guam
Hungary

Statistic al annex

101

TABLE A2 (cont.)
Share
Share of
of value
total labour
added from
force in
agriculture agriculture

Fertilizer
use
intensity

(Percentage)

(kg/ha)

Share of holdings
by farm size class
<1 ha

1–2 ha 2–5 ha

>5 ha

(Percentage)

Share of
agricultural
labour force
that is female

Share of
female labour
force in
agriculture

(Percentage)

Iceland

7.7

5.6

161.4

..

..

..

..

9.1

1.1

Ireland

1.5

5.6

424.1

..

2.2

6.1

91.8

7.4

0.9

..

1.4

238.1

..

..

..

..

21.7

0.7

Italy

2.2

2.7

99.9

38.1

19.2

20.6

22.2

47.0

2.9

Japan

1.2

1.7

244.8

68.5

20.0

9.1

2.4

39.6

1.6

Kuwait

Israel

0.4

1.0

462.2

..

..

..

..

0.0

0.0

Liechtenstein

..

0.0

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.0

Luxembourg

0.4

1.2

301.3

..

12.5

10.0

77.6

33.3

0.9

..

1.1

89.5

76.0

14.7

8.0

1.4

0.0

0.0

Malta
Monaco

..

0.0

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.0

1.8

2.2

273.7

..

15.9

15.4

68.7

37.7

1.8

New Caledonia

..

27.7

110.8

..

..

..

..

38.7

28.6

New Zealand

..

7.6

1 323.8

..

..

16.8

83.2

36.7

5.9

Northern Mariana
Islands

..

22.2

..

26.2

27.6

27.6

18.7

16.7

9.1

Norway

1.2

3.0

182.5

1.6

3.5

15.4

79.5

41.5

2.6

Oman

1.2

27.0

274.2

..

..

..

..

5.6

9.1

Poland

3.2

15.4

181.4

33.3

17.6

21.5

27.6

34.1

11.5

Portugal

2.2

8.5

92.1

26.9

27.7

24.2

21.2

68.3

12.3

Puerto Rico

0.8

0.9

..

..

..

52.7

47.3

7.7

0.2

Qatar

0.1

0.5

8 043.2

68.8

5.3

6.0

19.9

0.0

0.0

Republic of Korea

2.5

4.0

337.7

59.5

30.7

9.8

..

43.0

4.2

..

6.7

..

..

..

..

..

0.0

0.0

Saudi Arabia

1.8

3.9

185.4

..

..

..

..

4.8

1.2

Singapore

0.0

0.0

3 129.5

..

..

..

..

0.0

0.0

Slovakia

3.6

6.4

93.0

70.1

11.5

10.2

8.1

19.7

2.8

Slovenia

2.2

0.5

239.4

28.4

12.8

23.2

35.6

40.0

0.4

Spain

2.4

3.6

91.9

25.8

14.9

21.6

37.7

38.4

3.2

Sweden

1.5

2.0

74.1

..

3.4

8.6

88.0

37.9

1.6

Switzerland

0.7

3.0

201.4

19.7

7.1

11.1

62.1

46.3

3.0

Trinidad and Tobago

0.6

6.1

252.7

35.5

18.0

33.7

12.8

15.9

2.2

..

20.0

..

..

..

..

..

33.3

16.7

United Arab Emirates

0.7

2.6

354.8

..

..

..

..

0.0

0.0

United Kingdom

0.7

1.4

238.2

..

13.9

9.2

76.9

25.8

0.8

United States
of America

1.3

1.4

125.4

..

..

10.7

89.3

26.9

0.8

..

18.8

..

..

49.7

22.5

27.7

33.3

12.0

Netherlands

San Marino

Turks and Caicos Islands

United States Virgin
Islands

102

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

TABLE A3
Social assistance coverage, by population group
Share of population covered by social assistance
Total
population

by residence
rural

(Percentage)

rural, by income
quintile

urban

(Percentage)

poorest

richest

(Percentage)

urban, by income
quintile
poorest

richest

(Percentage)

LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES

25.7

30.5

24.5

35.1

20.3

39.6

11.8

East Asia and the Pacific, excluding China

39.8

46.8

35.1

60.6

32.1

61.9

16.4

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

American Samoa

0.5

0.4

1.0

0.2

0.2

0.0

3.1

China, mainland

Cambodia

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Malaysia
Marshall Islands
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Mongolia

9.6

..

..

..

..

..

..

41.1

50.7

30.9

64.1

30.1

64.6

3.8

4.6

5.9

3.0

7.9

5.3

0.0

2.8

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

82.8

93.0

77.7

97.1

87.8

87.6

68.1

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

6.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

83.2

84.5

82.2

92.1

72.1

91.1

69.0

Myanmar

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Palau

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

3.4

3.3

4.2

1.6

6.3

2.9

4.7

Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands

27.4

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

1.6

1.5

2.0

1.3

4.1

0.5

1.4

Thailand

70.4

74.6

61.0

87.6

63.7

75.1

52.9

Timor-Leste

26.3

23.9

32.8

25.4

24.5

28.0

34.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Tonga
Tuvalu

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Vanuatu

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

20.9

23.9

12.5

45.5

12.8

25.7

6.9

Viet Nam

Europe and Central Asia

32.4

39.6

28.7

57.4

24.3

44.7

18.4

Albania

33.2

39.3

26.8

49.5

25.7

39.2

17.3

Armenia

23.0

27.3

20.7

37.0

17.4

32.7

16.1

Azerbaijan

87.5

79.1

95.1

79.4

80.6

95.5

92.9

Belarus

58.3

56.6

58.9

65.6

45.4

69.8

46.7

Bosnia and Herzegovina

20.5

21.5

18.9

22.5

20.7

20.5

16.2

Bulgaria

39.5

44.1

37.6

64.4

27.9

54.2

22.8

Georgia

31.3

38.8

23.9

53.2

26.5

46.2

14.5

Kazakhstan

29.1

31.7

27.2

50.9

18.0

35.0

22.1

Kyrgyzstan

8.5

11.7

4.3

20.3

2.7

5.9

2.2

103

Statistic al annex

TABLE A3 (cont.)
Share of population covered by social assistance
Total
population

by residence
rural

(Percentage)

Latvia

40.2

rural, by income
quintile

urban

(Percentage)

40.5

poorest

richest

(Percentage)

40.1

46.1

urban, by income
quintile
poorest

richest

(Percentage)

41.9

36.0

40.2

Lithuania

58.7

65.5

55.3

72.1

57.4

65.6

42.8

Republic of Moldova

33.8

35.5

31.4

43.0

30.1

37.3

20.3

Romania

55.4

56.1

54.8

79.8

32.8

79.0

32.8

Russian Federation

28.2

39.4

24.1

58.7

20.1

38.2

14.8

Serbia

11.9

13.2

10.8

20.1

7.1

24.5

4.7

9.7

11.5

4.5

16.6

8.1

2.0

3.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

21.2

33.3

15.6

69.2

9.1

44.1

2.2

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

47.4

52.6

44.9

54.4

48.3

51.8

33.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

34.4

59.1

31.2

72.1

34.9

56.4

11.0

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Tajikistan
The former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina

9.4

Belize

16.3

14.9

17.6

17.6

9.9

20.0

11.4

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

54.4

66.2

48.2

74.8

54.0

63.2

31.0

Brazil

21.1

39.7

17.6

71.3

8.0

46.1

2.6

Chile

83.2

88.7

82.3

95.7

71.7

95.6

53.6

Colombia

41.7

55.0

38.1

66.1

35.7

60.5

14.0

Costa Rica

44.6

36.5

55.9

60.4

8.4

76.3

26.9

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic

8.0

5.7

9.3

5.9

2.5

13.5

4.2

23.7

29.4

21.0

41.0

14.3

33.9

4.0

Ecuador

64.7

85.1

54.2

91.7

68.3

77.7

18.6

El Salvador

42.6

63.9

30.2

76.7

42.9

51.0

6.9

Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

48.3

59.5

36.2

62.3

47.2

56.0

8.0

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.8

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.6

1.2

1.9

49.3

61.4

34.6

65.9

47.4

48.7

19.0

Jamaica

67.3

74.5

61.7

85.6

53.8

85.9

40.1

Mexico

48.9

77.8

40.5

87.3

52.2

63.5

13.8

Nicaragua

47.2

36.0

61.5

55.1

16.9

70.2

50.0

Panama

52.0

70.2

41.9

80.9

47.7

68.3

12.0

Paraguay

40.1

51.8

31.9

62.0

30.7

49.3

13.1

Peru

57.0

78.0

45.1

87.3

56.7

72.0

12.2

104

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

TABLE A3 (cont.)
Share of population covered by social assistance
Total
population

by residence
rural

(Percentage)

Saint Lucia

..

rural, by income
quintile

urban

(Percentage)

..

poorest

richest

(Percentage)

..

..

urban, by income
quintile
poorest

richest

(Percentage)

..

..

..

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Suriname

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

42.2

53.2

41.3

84.8

19.3

84.6

3.9

4.7

..

..

..

..

46.3

41.8

49.6

46.2

35.1

60.2

35.1

..

..

..

..

..

..

Uruguay
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

Middle East and North Africa
Algeria
Djibouti

10.8

45.8

4.1

55.3

30.9

6.1

2.7

Egypt

44.9

48.1

40.5

51.4

50.4

64.0

20.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

Iraq

80.0

81.5

79.4

87.0

72.6

86.2

66.3

Jordan

65.7

86.8

61.2

94.0

71.1

79.9

27.7

..

..

..

..

..

..

Iran (Islamic Republic of)

Lebanon

..

..

..

..

..

..

Morocco

Libya
36.8

44.9

30.9

50.6

34.7

44.3

14.7

Occupied Palestinian Territory

11.5

18.6

7.4

19.3

13.2

14.5

1.9

Syrian Arab Republic

..

..

..

..

..

..

Tunisia

..

..

..

..

..

..

14.6

10.0

17.2

12.8

14.7

7.6

Yemen

13.4

South Asia

17.1

26.1

10.7

27.3

16.4

18.4

3.8

Afghanistan

15.3

18.4

3.5

24.0

12.0

4.8

1.7

Bangladesh

14.6

17.8

5.3

25.9

9.7

11.9

2.0

1.0

1.2

0.4

1.9

0.9

0.3

0.7

17.2

28.4

11.1

28.0

17.9

19.8

2.9

3.8

1.5

3.1

1.4

0.8

3.6

2.0

38.7

41.5

27.0

51.2

29.9

31.8

25.5

Bhutan
India
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan

12.6

13.2

11.2

11.6

10.7

15.3

9.1

Sri Lanka

29.7

33.2

16.0

59.3

8.4

22.8

3.5

..

..

Sub-Saharan Africa

18.9

19.9

17.4

21.6

16.4

21.5

10.1

Angola

..

..

..

..

..

..

Benin

..

..

..

..

..

..

Botswana

70.3

73.3

68.1

89.5

45.4

91.2

37.5

Burkina Faso

34.3

29.9

53.9

29.5

30.3

62.6

45.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

Cabo Verde

21.9

25.2

19.3

26.6

18.6

17.2

22.9

Cameroon

1.4

0.5

2.4

0.2

0.7

1.1

2.6

Burundi

105

Statistic al annex

TABLE A3 (cont.)
Share of population covered by social assistance
Total
population

by residence
rural

(Percentage)

Central African Republic

rural, by income
quintile

urban

(Percentage)

..

poorest

richest

(Percentage)

..

..

urban, by income
quintile
poorest

richest

(Percentage)

..

..

..

Chad

..

..

..

..

..

..

Comoros

..

..

..

..

..

..

5.1

6.3

0.7

0.0

2.2

1.7

Congo

0.9

Côte d’Ivoire

5.8

0.4

1.3

2.4

2.7

4.3

13.0

Democratic Republic of the Congo

5.5

3.8

8.4

3.8

4.6

7.3

5.1

..

..

..

..

..

..

Ethiopia

13.2

15.0

4.4

17.7

10.9

6.8

2.3

Eritrea

Gabon

44.8

35.2

47.2

36.9

25.4

56.6

28.5

Gambia

2.9

2.1

3.8

0.7

3.5

3.6

4.1

Ghana

6.1

5.8

6.5

6.5

4.8

6.3

4.6

..

..

..

..

..

..

Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya

20.0

..

..

..

..

..

..

22.6

9.8

35.0

13.6

14.2

8.5

Lesotho

51.6

58.5

32.8

65.5

46.9

55.4

16.0

Liberia

61.2

68.7

44.1

67.2

73.7

41.3

39.9

0.9

0.9

1.1

2.3

0.5

1.3

0.8

20.2

19.5

23.8

20.0

17.5

23.8

11.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania

33.5

34.4

32.5

28.5

38.5

30.9

30.5

Mauritius

40.6

..

..

..

..

..

..

Mozambique

5.4

6.4

3.1

9.2

4.2

4.4

2.2

Namibia

9.8

12.6

4.6

21.6

6.5

10.0

3.7

Niger

2.7

2.9

2.0

2.8

2.5

2.2

0.5

Nigeria

1.7

1.7

1.5

1.0

2.5

2.5

0.7

Rwanda

1.4

1.6

0.3

0.5

2.9

0.3

1.0

..

..

..

..

..

..

10.3

6.8

15.0

6.8

4.6

12.2

12.8

..

..

..

..

..

..

30.2

29.2

31.8

35.2

26.0

35.6

27.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

58.5

75.7

47.7

84.5

49.6

74.6

17.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

51.6

61.5

20.7

72.7

41.2

29.6

10.2

..

..

..

..

..

..

Uganda

66.8

72.6

45.9

77.6

59.9

60.7

23.1

United Republic of Tanzania

77.4

77.4

77.5

78.5

74.6

82.8

69.5

0.6

0.7

0.4

1.2

0.4

0.4

0.2

..

..

..

..

..

..

Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Togo

Zambia
Zimbabwe

106

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

TABLE A4
Social assistance transfer amounts, by population group, and benefit incidence
Average daily transfer of social assistance per beneficiary
All
beneficiaries

By residence
Rural

Urban

Rural, by
income quintile
Poorest

Richest

Urban, by
income quintile
Poorest

Richest

(2005 PPP dollars)

Share of total
transfer received
by the poorest
quintile (benefit
incidence)
(Percentage)

LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME
COUNTRIES

0.32

0.20

0.42

0.14

0.37

0.30

0.92

21.5

East Asia and the Pacific, excluding
China

0.15

0.11

0.19

0.04

0.25

0.08

0.33

21.5

American Samoa

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.34

0.09

0.81

0.01

0.12

..

1.23

0.2

China, mainland

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.65

..

..

..

..

..

..

13.7

Cambodia

Fiji
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Malaysia
Marshall Islands

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.32

0.30

0.37

0.15

0.63

..

0.02

8.8

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.21

0.23

0.20

0.21

0.25

0.15

0.33

20.8

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Micronesia (Federated States of)

1.02

..

..

..

..

..

..

3.6

Mongolia

0.28

0.29

0.27

0.28

0.29

0.27

0.27

22.6

Myanmar

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Papua New Guinea

Palau

0.10

0.03

0.46

0.01

0.05

0.06

1.70

2.3

Philippines

0.18

..

..

..

..

..

..

45.2

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.59

0.40

1.35

0.17

0.55

0.16

2.62

4.0

Samoa
Solomon Islands
Thailand

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.02

7.4

Timor-Leste

0.18

0.10

0.35

0.01

0.20

0.12

0.67

0.9

Tonga

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Tuvalu

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Vanuatu

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.19

0.18

0.25

0.05

0.46

0.07

0.53

13.8

Viet Nam

Europe and Central Asia

0.60

0.56

0.64

0.51

0.72

0.58

1.02

29.3

Albania

0.34

0.34

0.35

0.17

1.62

0.18

0.70

14.3

Armenia

0.39

0.40

0.38

0.48

0.28

0.39

0.32

32.4

Azerbaijan

2.20

1.83

2.47

1.70

2.20

2.25

2.87

18.0

Belarus

1.06

0.97

1.09

1.34

0.74

1.40

0.96

29.2

Bosnia and Herzegovina

2.73

2.50

3.14

1.52

3.87

1.84

5.00

13.2

Bulgaria

0.74

0.81

0.70

0.53

1.24

0.63

0.87

24.5

Georgia

0.40

0.35

0.48

0.41

0.26

0.49

0.72

37.0

Kazakhstan

0.19

0.16

0.20

0.13

0.26

0.17

0.25

22.4

Statistic al annex

107

TABLE A4 (cont.)
Average daily transfer of social assistance per beneficiary
All
beneficiaries

By residence
Rural

Urban

Rural, by
income quintile
Poorest

Richest

Urban, by
income quintile
Poorest

Richest

(2005 PPP dollars)

Kyrgyzstan

0.56

0.51

0.72

0.57

Share of total
transfer received
by the poorest
quintile (benefit
incidence)
(Percentage)

0.78

0.60

0.93

36.2

Latvia

1.29

1.12

1.36

0.96

1.07

1.29

1.81

17.0

Lithuania

0.87

0.93

0.84

0.93

1.29

0.88

1.12

24.6

Republic of Moldova

0.50

0.51

0.48

0.56

0.47

0.44

0.68

26.8

Romania

0.51

0.52

0.50

0.60

0.58

0.54

0.62

31.7

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Russian Federation
Serbia

1.00

0.90

1.09

0.84

1.55

0.82

2.89

30.7

Tajikistan

0.14

0.10

0.44

0.03

0.10

0.06

1.93

7.6

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.35

0.32

0.39

0.21

0.49

0.72

0.78

38.4

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.65

0.55

0.71

0.63

0.50

0.72

0.78

23.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.48

0.45

0.49

0.34

0.88

0.35

0.93

31.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

The former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina

1.01

..

..

..

..

..

..

40.0

Belize

0.08

0.06

0.09

0.12

0.02

0.02

0.25

18.7

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

0.16

0.19

0.14

0.02

0.27

0.04

0.35

9.3

Brazil

0.68

0.57

0.73

0.41

1.84

0.47

1.33

33.2

Chile

0.46

0.79

0.41

0.61

0.64

0.45

0.20

24.1

Colombia

0.29

0.25

0.31

0.25

0.28

0.19

1.09

21.3

Costa Rica

0.16

0.16

0.17

0.15

0.04

0.15

0.15

27.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Cuba
Dominica

0.97

0.92

0.99

0.03

3.19

0.10

6.00

2.4

Dominican Republic

0.24

0.27

0.22

0.21

0.40

0.20

0.27

25.7

Ecuador

0.19

0.28

0.12

0.22

0.29

0.15

0.05

27.9

El Salvador

0.03

0.03

0.01

0.05

0.03

0.01

0.04

43.9

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.23

0.23

0.22

0.17

0.28

0.17

0.41

19.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti

0.01

0.01

0.02

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.02

5.7

Honduras

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.05

0.09

0.03

0.26

17.3

Jamaica

0.08

0.12

0.03

0.19

0.06

0.06

0.01

44.1

Mexico

0.64

0.95

0.47

0.73

1.42

0.44

0.94

29.6

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

48.7

Nicaragua
Panama

0.04

0.07

0.01

0.04

0.02

0.00

0.07

48.7

Paraguay

0.03

0.05

0.01

0.04

0.08

0.00

0.09

39.7

Peru

0.05

0.10

0.00

0.11

0.05

0.01

0.00

56.4

108

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 2015

TABLE A4 (cont.)
Average daily transfer of social assistance per beneficiary
All
beneficiaries

By residence
Rural

Urban

Rural, by
income quintile
Poorest

Richest

Urban, by
income quintile
Poorest

Richest

(2005 PPP dollars)

Saint Lucia

..

..

..

..

Share of total
transfer received
by the poorest
quintile (benefit
incidence)
(Percentage)

..

..

..

..

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Suriname

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.33

0.32

0.33

0.33

0.31

0.34

0.38

41.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.10

0.09

0.10

0.08

0.13

0.09

0.17

21.9

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Djibouti

0.15

0.17

0.10

0.09

0.29

..

..

53.8

Egypt

0.10

0.10

0.11

0.07

0.14

0.07

0.24

17.6

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Uruguay
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

Middle East and North Africa
Algeria

Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Iraq

0.09

0.09

0.09

0.07

0.10

0.08

0.11

18.2

Jordan

0.22

0.25

0.22

0.26

0.42

0.19

0.54

22.7

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Lebanon
Libya

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Morocco

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.05

0.07

0.04

0.04

0.10

0.03

0.01

38.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Occupied Palestinian Territory
Syrian Arab Republic
Tunisia

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Yemen

0.07

0.08

0.07

0.07

0.13

0.06

0.10

22.9

South Asia

0.15

0.14

0.22

0.08

0.23

0.12

0.50

18.3

Afghanistan

0.05

0.03

0.54

0.01

0.09

0.19

1.31

6.7

Bangladesh

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.10

0.05

0.07

24.7

Bhutan

0.08

0.05

0.26

0.03

0.09

0.02

0.46

15.3

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

India
Maldives

0.35

..

..

..

..

..

..

25.7

Nepal

0.05

0.04

0.08

0.03

0.06

0.04

0.13

15.7

Pakistan

0.28

0.25

0.35

0.13

0.49

0.18

0.86

11.6

Sri Lanka

0.10

0.10

0.08

0.09

0.20

0.08

0.15

32.5

Sub-Saharan Africa

0.21

0.12

0.37

0.06

0.27

0.20

1.36

9.4

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Angola

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Botswana

Benin

0.33

0.28

0.36

0.20

0.44

0.20

0.83

16.6

Burkina Faso

0.13

0.05

0.35

0.01

0.09

0.13

0.83

2.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Cabo Verde

Burundi

0.29

0.26

0.32

0.17

0.42

0.18

0.37

14.8

Cameroon

0.72

0.63

0.73

0.02

1.09

0.37

1.37

0.8

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Central African Republic

Statistic al annex

109

TABLE A4 (cont.)
Average daily transfer of social assistance per beneficiary
All
beneficiaries

By residence
Rural

Urban

Rural, by
income quintile
Poorest

Richest

Urban, by
income quintile
Poorest

Richest

(2005 PPP dollars)

Chad
Comoros
Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Eritrea
Ethiopia

..

..

..

..

Share of total
transfer received
by the poorest
quintile (benefit
incidence)
(Percentage)

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

1.44

0.43

1.65

0.73

0.36

0.61

4.33

10.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.01

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.01

4.5

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Gabon

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.06

0.01

0.13

5.8

Gambia

0.07

0.02

0.10

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.16

2.1

Ghana

0.01

0.02

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

11.7

Guinea

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Kenya

Guinea-Bissau

0.07

0.05

0.33

0.02

0.13

0.03

1.45

7.9

Lesotho

0.19

0.19

0.20

0.14

0.32

0.12

0.54

17.3

Liberia

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.0

Madagascar

0.17

0.21

0.04

0.04

1.75

0.01

0.04

8.9

Malawi

0.01

0.01

0.02

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.15

10.8

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Mauritania

1.58

1.26

2.01

0.48

2.82

0.89

4.31

7.2

Mauritius

1.96

..

..

..

..

..

..

14.2

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Mali

Mozambique
Namibia

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Niger

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Nigeria

0.04

0.02

0.08

0.00

0.02

0.05

0.11

11.1

Rwanda

0.06

0.04

0.42

0.01

0.07

0.02

0.69

0.9

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.15

0.04

0.22

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.55

3.6

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

15.1

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

1.16

1.07

1.29

0.76

1.54

0.82

5.99

20.8

Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.18

0.14

0.56

0.09

0.37

0.12

1.15

13.7

Togo

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Uganda

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.03

0.00

0.04

4.1

United Republic of Tanzania
Zambia

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Zimbabwe

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

• References
• Special chapters of

The State of Food and Agriculture

113
References
Abay, K.A., Kahsay, G.A. & Berhane, G. 2014. Social
networks and factor markets: panel data evidence
from Ethiopia. ESSP Working Paper 68. Addis
Ababa, Ethiopian Development Research Institute
and Washington, DC, IFPRI.
ACT International. 2013. Social Mobilisation –
National Cash Transfer Programme (BISP). Project
completion report. 28 February. Pakistan, ACT
International.
Adams, L. & Kebede, E. 2005. Breaking the poverty
cycle. A case study of cash interventions in
Ethiopia. The Humanitarian Policy Group (HPG).
London, Overseas Development Institute.
Adato, M. 2000. The impact of PROGRESA on
community social relationships. Final report.
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Adato, M. & Hoddinott, J. 2007. Conditional cash
transfer programs: a “magic bullet” for reducing
poverty? 2020 Focus Brief on the World’s Poor and
Hungry People. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Adelman, S., Alderman, H., Gilligan, D.O. &
Lehrer, K. 2008. The impact of alternative food for
education programs on learning achievement and
cognitive development in Northern Uganda. IFPRI
Working Paper. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Adesina, A.A. 2010. Conditioning trends shaping
the agricultural and rural landscape in Africa.
Agricultural Economics, 41(S1): 73–82.
Agapto, J.P., Borsatto, R.S., Esquerdo, V.F. de S.
& Bergamasco, S.M.P.P. 2012. Avaliação do
Programa de Aquisição de Alimentos (PAA) em
Campina do Monte Alegre, Estado de São Paulo, a
partir da percepção dos agricultores. Informações
Econômicas, 42(2): 13–21.
Ahmed, A. 2004. Impact of feeding children
in school: evidence from Bangladesh.
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Ahmed A.U., Rabbani, M., Sulaiman, M. & Das, N.C.
2009.The impact of asset transfer on livelihoods
of the ultra poor in Bangladesh. IFPRI Research
Monograph No. 39. Washington, DC, IFPRI and
Dhaka, BRAC.
Ahmed, A.U., Quisumbing, A.R, Nasreen, M.,
Hoddinott, J.F. & Bryan, E. 2009. Comparing
food and cash transfers to the ultra poor in
Bangladesh. IFPRI Research Monograph 163.
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Ahmed, A.U., Hill, R.V., Smith, L.C., Wiesmann, D.M.,
Frankenberger, T., Gulati, K., Quabili, W. &
Yohannes, Y. 2007. The world’s most deprived:

characteristics and causes of extreme poverty
and hunger. 2020 Discussion Paper 43.
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Akresh, R., de Walque, D. & Kazianga, H. 2012.
Alternative cash transfer delivery mechanisms:
impacts on routine preventative health clinic visits
in Burkina Faso. IZA Discussion Paper No. 6321.
Bonn, Germany, Institute for the Study of Labor.
Albarran, P. & Attanasio, O.P. 2002. Do public
transfers crowd out private transfers? Evidence
from a randomized experiment in Mexico. UNU/
WIDER Discussion Paper No. 2002/6. Helsinki,
United Nations University World Institute for
Development Economics Research.
Al-Hassan, R. & Poulton, C. 2009. Agriculture and
social protection in Ghana. FAC Working Paper 09.
Brighton, UK, Future Agricultures Consortium.
Alderman, H. 2010. The economic cost of a poor
start to life. Journal of Developmental Origins of
Health and Disease, 1(1): 19–25.
Alderman, H. & Haque, T. 2007. Insurance against
covariate shocks: the role of index-based
insurance in social protection in low-income
countries of Africa. World Bank Working Paper
No. 95. Africa Human Development Series.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Alderman, H. & Mustafa, M. 2013. What are the
policy lessons learned and what are the success
factors. Panel 3: Social protection and nutrition.
Document of the preparatory technical meeting
for the International Conference on Nutrition
(ICN2). Rome, 13–15 November 2013.
Alderman, H. & Paxson, C.H. 1992. Do the poor
insure? A synthesis of the literature on risk
and consumption in developing countries.
Policy Research Working Paper No.1008.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Alderman, H. & Yemtsov, R. 2014. How can safety
nets contribute to economic Growth? World Bank
Economic Review, 28(1): 1–20.
Alzúa, M.L., Cruces, G. & Ripani, L. 2012. Welfare
programs and labor supply in developing
countries: experimental evidence from Latin
America. IZA Discussion Paper No. 6959. Bonn,
Germany, Institute for the Study of Labor
American Institutes for Research. 2013. Zambia’s
Child Grant Program: 24-month impact report.
Washington, DC.
Andrews, C., Backiny-Yetna, P., Garin, E., Weedon, E.,
Wodon, Q. & Zampaglione, G. 2011. Liberia’s

114
cash for work temporary employment project
responding to crisis in low income, fragile
countries. Social Protection Discussion Paper
No. 1114. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Angelucci, M. & Attanasio, O. 2009. Oportunidades:
program effect on consumption, low
participation, and methodological issues. IZA
Discussion Paper No. 4475. Bonn, Germany,
Institute for the Study of Labor.
Angelucci, M. & De Giorgi, G. 2009. Indirect effects
of an aid programme: how do cash transfers
affect ineligibles’ consumption? American
Economic Review, 99(1): 486–508.
Angelucci, M., De Giorgi, G., Rangel, M.A. &
Rasul, I. 2009. Insurance and investment within
family networks. BREAD Working Paper No. 260.
Bureau for Research and Economic Analysis of
Development.
Ardington, C., Case, A. & Hosegood, V. 2009.
Labor supply responses to large social transfers:
longitudinal evidence from South Africa.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
1(1): 22–48.
Asfaw, S., Davis, B., Dewbre, J., Handa, S. &
Winters, P. 2014. Cash transfer programme,
productive activities and labour supply:
evidence from a randomised experiment in
Kenya. The Journal of Development Studies,
50(8): 1172–1196.
Assefa Arega, M. & Shively, G. 2014. Food aid,
cash transfers and producer prices in Ethiopia.
Unpublished working paper.
AusAID (Australian Agency for International
Development). 2011. Targeting the poorest: an
assessment of the proxy means test methodology.
Canberra.
Ayele, Z. & Peacock, C. 2003. Improving access
to and consumption of animal source foods in
rural households: the experience of a womenfocused goat development program in the
highlands of Ethiopia. Journal of Nutrition,
133(11 Suppl. 2): 3981S–3986S.
Azam, M. 2012. The impact of the Indian Job
Guarantee Scheme on labor market outcomes:
evidence from a natural experiment. IZA
Discussion Paper No. 6548. Bonn, Germany,
Institute for the Study of Labor.
Baird, S., Ferreira, F.H.G., Ӧzler, B. & Woolcock, M.
2013. Relative effectiveness of conditional
and unconditional cash transfers for schooling
in developing countries: a systematic review.
Campbell Systematic Reviews, 2013: 8.
Banerjee, A. & Duflo, E. 2007. The economic lives
of the poor. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
21(1): 141–167.

Banerjee, A., Karlan, D. & Zinman, J. 2015.
Six randomized evaluations of microcredit:
introduction and further steps. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 1–21.
Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., Goldberg, N., Karlan, D.,
Osei, R., Parienté, W., Shapiro, J., Thuysbaert, B.
& Udry, C. 2015. A multifaceted program causes
lasting progress for the poor: Evidence from six
countries. Science, 348(6236):
Banerji, A. & Gentilini, U. 2013. Social safety nets:
lessons from global evidence and practice. Paper
prepared as part of the World Bank’s participation
at the Bank of Namibia’s Annual Symposium on
Social Safety Nets in Namibia: Assessing Current
Programs and Future Options (26 September 2013,
Windhoek). Washington, DC, World Bank.
Barca, V., Brook, S., Holland, J., Otulana, M. &
Pozarny, P. 2015. Qualitative research and
analyses of the economic impacts of cash transfer
programmes in sub-Saharan Africa. Synthesis
report. Rome, FAO.
Barrett, C.B. 2002. Food security and food assistance
programs. In B.L. Gardner & G.C. Rausser,
eds. Handbook of Agricultural Economics.
Vol. 2B (2103–2190). Amsterdam, Elsevier.
Barrett, C.B. 2010. Food systems and the escape
from poverty and ill-health traps in sub-Saharan
Africa. In P. Pinstrup-Andersen, ed. The African
food system and its interaction with human
health and nutrition. Ithaca, New York, USA,
Cornell University Press.
Barrett, C.B. 2011. Assisting the escape from
persistent ultra-poverty in rural Africa. Paper
prepared for Stanford University’s Global Food
Policy and Food Security Symposium Series. Center
on Food Security and the Environment. Stanford,
CA, USA, University of Stanford.
Barrett, C.B. & Clay, D.C. 2003. Self-targeting
accuracy in the presence of imperfect factor
markets: evidence from Food-for-Work in Ethiopia.
Journal of Development Studies, 39(5): 152–180.
Barrett, C.B. & McPeak, J.G. 2006. Poverty traps
and safety nets. In A. de Janvry & R. Kanbur,
eds. Poverty, inequality and development: essays
in honor of Erik Thorbecke. Volume 1. Berlin,
Springer.
Barrett, C.B., Holden, S. & Clay, D. 2005. Can foodfor-work programs reduce vulnerability? In
S. Dercon, ed. Insurance against poverty. Oxford,
UK, Oxford University Press.
Barrientos, A. 2003. What is the impact of noncontributory pensions on poverty? Estimates from
Brazil and South Africa. CPRC Working Paper
No. 33. University of Manchester, Chronic Poverty
Research Centre.

115
Barrientos, A. 2010. Social protection and
poverty. Poverty Reduction and Policy Regimes
Thematic Paper. Social Policy and Development
Programme Paper No. 42. Geneva, Switzerland,
United Nations Research Institute for Social
Development (UNRISD).
Barrientos, A. 2012. Social transfers and growth:
what do we know? What do we need to find
out? World Development, 40(1): 11–20.
Barrientos, A. 2014. Antipoverty transfers and
agriculture: theory and context. Background
paper prepared for The State of Food and
Agriculture 2015. Social protection and
agriculture: breaking the cycle of rural poverty.
Manchester, UK, Brooks World Poverty Institute,
University of Manchester. Unpublished.
Barrientos, A. & Hinojosa-Valencia, L. 2009. A
review of social protection in Latin America.
Prepared as part of a Social Protection Scoping
Study funded by the Ford Foundation. Brighton,
UK, Institute for Development Studies.
Baulch, B. & McCulloch, N. 1998. Being poor
and becoming poor: poverty status and
poverty transitions in rural Pakistan. IDS
Working Paper 79. Brighton, UK, Institute of
Development Studies.
Beegle, K., De Weerdt, J. & Dercon, S. 2008. Adult
mortality and consumption growth in Tanzania.
Economic Development and Cultural Change,
56(2): 299–326.
Beegle, K., Dehejia, R.H. & Gatti, R. 2006. Child
labor and agricultural shocks. Journal of
Development Economics, 81: 80–96.
Behrman, J.R. 2007. Policy-Oriented Research
Impact Assessment (PORIA) case study on the
International Food Policy Research Institute
(IFPRI) and the Mexican PROGRESA anti-poverty
and human resource investment conditional
cash transfer program. IFPRI Impact Assessment
Discussion Paper No. 27. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Behrman, J.R. & Hoddinott, J. 2005. Programme
evaluation with unobserved heterogeneity
and selective implementation: the Mexican
PROGRESA impact on child nutrition.
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,
67(4): 547–569.
Béné, C. 2009. Are fishers poor or vulnerable?
Assessing economic vulnerability in small-scale
fishing communities. Journal of Development
Studies, 45(6): 911–933.
Béné, C., Devereux, S. & Roelen, K. 2014.
Social protection and sustainable natural
resource management: good practices and
recommendations from small-scale fisheries.
Report prepared for the Food and Agriculture

Organization of the United Nations. Brighton,
UK, Centre for Social Protection, Institute of
Development Studies.
Berg, J. & Tobin, S. 2011. Income-led growth as
a crisis response: lessons from Brazil. Paper
prepared for the Research Conference on
Key Lessons from the Crisis and Way Forward,
16–17 February 2011. Geneva, Switzerland,
International Labour Organization.
Berhane, G., Hoddinott, J., Kumar, N. & Taffesse,
A.S. 2011. The impact of Ethiopia’s Productive
Safety Nets and Household Asset Building
Programme: 2006–2010. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Berhane, G., Gilligan, D.O., Hoddinott, J., Kumar, N.
& Taffesse, A.S. 2014. Can social protection work
in Africa? The impact of Ethiopia’s Productive
Safety Net Programme. Economic Development
and Cultural Change, 63(1): 1–26.
Berhane, G., Hoddinott, J., Kumar, N., Taffesse, A.S.,
Diressie, M.T., Yohannes, Y., Sabates-Wheeler, R.,
Handion, M., Lind, J., Tefera, M. & Sima, F. 2013.
Evaluation of Ethiopia’s Food Security Program:
documenting progress in the implementation
of the Productive Safety Nets Programme and
the Household Asset Building Programme.
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Bianchi, M. & M. Bobba. 2013. Liquidity, risk, and
occupational choices. Review of Economic Studies,
80(2): 491–511.
Bioversity International. 2012. The impact of
organic bananas in Alto Beni, Bolivia. Impact
Assessment Brief No. 7. Rome.
Boone, R., Covarrubias, K., Davis, B. & Winters, P.
2013. Cash transfer programmes and agricultural
production: the case of Malawi. Agricultural
Economics, 44(3): 365–378.
Breisinger, C., Al-Riffai, P., Ecker, O., Abuismail, R.,
Waite, J., Abdelwahab, N., Zohery, A., El-Laithy, H.
& Armanious, D. 2013. Tackling Egypt’s rising food
insecurity in a time of transition. Joint IFPRI-WFP
Country Policy Note, May 2013. Washington, DC,
IFPRI and Rome, WFP.
Burke, W.J., Jayne, T.S. & Sitko, N.J. 2012. Can the
FISP more effectively achieve food production and
poverty reduction goals? Food Security Research
Project – Zambia. Policy Synthesis No. 51. Ministry
of Agriculture & Cooperatives, Agricultural
Consultative Forum, Michigan State University,
Lusaka.
Bynner, J.B. & Paxton, W. 2001. The asset effect.
London, Institute for Public Policy Research.
Carter, M.R. 1997. Environment, technology, and
the social articulation of risk in West African
agriculture. Economic Development and Cultural
Change, 45(3): 557–590.

116
Chirwa, E. & Dorward, A. 2013. Agricultural input
subsidies. The recent Malawi experience. Oxford,
UK, Oxford University Press.
Christiaensen, L., Demery, L. & Kuhl, J. 2011. The
(evolving) role of agriculture in poverty reduction:
an empirical perspective. Journal of Development
Economics, 96(2): 239–254.
Cirillo, C., Gyori, M. & Soares, F.V. 2014. The role of
targeting in social protection programmes and
agriculture interventions: what have we learned
so far? Background paper prepared for The State
of Food and Agriculture 2015. Social protection
and agriculture: breaking the cycle of rural
poverty. International Policy Centre for Inclusive
Growth–United Nations Development Programme.
Unpublished.
Coady, D., Grosh, M. & Hoddinott, J. 2004. Targeting of
transfers in developing countries: review of lessons
and experience. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Collier, P. & Dercon, S. 2009. African agriculture
in 50 Years: Smallholders in a rapidly changing
world? Paper presented at the Expert Meeting on
How to Feed the World in 2050, 24–26 June 2009.
Rome, FAO.
Cornia, G.A., Deottti, L. & Sassi, M. 2012. Food
price volatility over the last decade in Niger and
Malawi: extent, sources and impact on child
malnutrition. Working Paper No. 2012–002. United
Nations Development Programme, Regional
Bureau for Africa.
Covarrubias, K., Davis, B. & Winters, P. 2012. From
protection to production: productive impacts of
the Malawi social cash transfer scheme. Journal of
Development Effectiveness, 4(1): 50–77.
Creti, P. 2010. The impact of cash transfers on local
markets: a case study of unstructured markets
in Northern Uganda. Oxford, UK, CALP (Cash
Learning Partnership of Oxfam GB, Save the
Children UK, the British Red Cross, Action Contre
la Faim International and the Norwegian Refugee
Council).
Croppenstedt, A., Goldstein, M. & Rosas, N.
2013. Gender and agriculture: inefficiencies,
segregation, and low productivity traps. World
Bank Research Observer, 28(1): 79–109.
Cunha, J.M, De Giorgi, G. & Jayachandran, S. 2011.
The price effects of cash versus in-kind transfers.
Working Paper No. 17456. Cambridge, MA, USA,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Daidone, S., Davis, B., Dewbre, J. & Covarrubias, K.
2014. Lesotho’s Child Grant Programme: 24-month
impact report on productive activities and labour
allocation. Lesotho country case study report. PtoP
(From Protection to Production) project report.
Rome, FAO.

Daidone, S., Pellerano, L., Handa, S. & Davis, B.
2015. Is graduation from social safety nets
possible? Evidence from sub-Saharan Africa.
In S. Devereux & R. Sabates-Wheeler, eds.
Graduating from Social Protection? IDS Bulletin,
46(2): 93–102.
Daidone, S., Davis, B., Dewbre, J., GonzálezFlores, M., Handa, S., Seidenfeld, D. & Tembo, G.
2014. Zambia’s Child Grant Programme: 24-month
impact report on productive activities and labour
allocation. PtoP (From Protection to Production)
project report. Rome, FAO.
Das, N.C. & Shams, R. 2011. Asset transfer
programme for the ultra-poor: a randomized
control trial evaluation, challenging the frontier
of poverty reduction. CFPR Working Paper No. 22.
Dhaka, BRAC.
Davis, B. & Handa, S. 2015. How much do
programmes pay? Transfer size in selected
national cash transfer programmes in subSaharan Africa. The Transfer Project. Research
Brief No. 2015–09. Chapel Hill, NC, USA, Carolina
Population Center, University of North Carolina.
Davis, B. & Knowles, M. 2015. From protection to
production: the role of social cash transfers in
fostering broad-based economic development.
From Protection to Production Project and
the Transfer Project. Presentation made to
Department for International Development,
London. Rome, FAO.
Davis, B., Di Giuseppe, S. & Zezza, A. 2014. Income
diversification patterns in rural sub-Saharan
Africa: reassessing the evidence. Policy Research
Working Paper No. 7108. Washington, DC, World
Bank.
Davis, B., Gaarder, M., Handa, S. & Yablonski, J.
2012. Evaluating the impact of cash transfer
programmes in sub-Saharan Africa: an
introduction to the special issue. Journal of
Development Effectiveness, 4(1): 1–8.
Davis, B., Handa, S., Hypher, N., Winder Rossi, N.,
Winters, P. & Yablonski, J., eds (forthcoming).
From evidence to action: the story of cash
transfers and impact evaluation in sub Saharan
Africa. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
de Brauw, A., Gilligan, D.O., Hoddinott, J. & Roy,
S. 2014. The impact of Bolsa Família on women’s
decision-making power. World Development,
59: 487–504.
de Brauw, A., Gilligan, D.O., Hoddinott, J. & Roy, S.
2015. Bolsa Família and household labor supply.
Economic Development and Cultural Change,
63(3): 423–457.
de la Brière, B. & Lindert, K. 2005. Reforming
Brazil’s Cadastro Único to improve the targeting

117
of the Bolsa Família Program. Social Protection
Discussion Paper Series No. 0527. Washington, DC,
World Bank.
de la O Campos, A.P. 2015. Do cash transfers
empower women? Impacts on economic
advancement, decision-making and agency. PtoP
(From Protection to Production) policy brief.
Rome, FAO.
Deininger, K. & Liu, Y. 2013. Welfare and poverty
impacts of India’s national rural employment
guarantee scheme: evidence from Andhra
Pradesh. IFPRI Discussion Paper 01289.
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Del Grossi, M.E. & Marques, V.P.M. de A. 2015. An
in-depth review of the evolution of integrated
public policies to strength family farms in Brazil.
ESA Working Paper 15-01. Rome, FAO.
Delgado, G.C. & Cardoso, J.C. 2004. O idoso e a
previdência rural no Brasil: a experiência recente
da universalizaҫão. In Ch. 9. Camarano, A.A., ed.
Os novos idosos brasileiros: muito além dos 60?
Brasilia, Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada.
Demeke, M., Spinelli, A., Croce, S., Pernechele, V.,
Stefanelli, E., Jafari, A., Pangrazio, G., Carrasco,
G., Lanos, B. & Roux, C. 2014. Food and
agriculture policy decisions: trends, emerging
issues and policy alignments since the 2007/08
food security crisis. Rome, FAO.
Dercon, S. 1996. Risk, crop choice, and savings:
evidence from Tanzania. Economic Development
and Cultural Change, 44(3): 485–513.
Dercon, S. 2002. Income risk, coping strategies and
safety nets. UNU/WIDER Discussion Paper No.
2002/22. Helsinki, United Nations University World
Institute for Development Economics Research.
Dercon, S. 2005. Risk, poverty and vulnerability
in Africa. Journal of African Economies
14(4): 483–488.
Dercon, S. 2008. Fate and fear: risk and its
consequences in Africa. Journal of African
Economies, 17(AERC Suppl. 2): ii97–ii127.
Dercon, S. 2011. Social protection, efficiency and
growth. CSAE Working Paper 2011–17. Oxford,
UK, Centre for the Study of African Economies,
Oxford University.
Dercon, S. & Christiaensen, L. 2011. Consumption
risk, technology adoption and poverty traps:
evidence from Ethiopia. Journal of Development
Economics, 96(2): 159–173.
Dercon, S. & Krishnan, P. 2000. Vulnerability,
seasonality and poverty in Ethiopia. Journal of
Development Studies, 36(6): 25–53.
Dercon, S. & Porter, C. 2010. Live aid revisited: longterm impacts of the 1984 Ethiopian famine on
children. CSAE Working Paper 2010–39. Oxford,

UK, Centre for the Study of African Economies,
Oxford University.
Dercon, S., Hoddinott, J. & Woldehanna, T. 2005.
Shocks and consumption in 15 Ethiopian villages,
1999–2004. Journal of African Economies,
14(4): 559–585.
Devereux, S. 1999. Making less last longer: informal
safety nets in Malawi. IDS Discussion Paper
No 373. Brighton, UK, Institute of Development
Studies.
Devereux, S. 2001. Livelihood insecurity and
social protection: a re-emerging issue in rural
development. Development Policy Review, 19
(4): 507–519.
Devereux, S. 2002. Can social safety nets reduce
chronic poverty? Development Policy Review,
20(5): 657–675.
Devereux, S. 2015. Social protection for rural
poverty reduction. Background paper
commissioned by the FAO. Rome. Unpublished.
Devereux, S. & Guenther, B. 2009. Agriculture
and social protection in Ethiopia. FAC Research
Paper No. 008. Brighton, UK, Future Agricultures
Consortium.
Devereux, S. & Sabates-Wheeler, R. 2004.
Transformative social protection. IDS Working
Paper No. 232. Brighton, UK, Institute of
Development Studies.
Devereux, S., Sabates-Wheeler, R. & Pascual
Martínez, A. 2010. Home-grown school feeding
and social protection. HGSF Working Paper
Series No. 5. London, The Partnership for Child
Development.
Devereux, S., Sabates-Wheeler, R., Tefera, M. &
Taye, H. 2006. Ethiopia’s productive safety net
programme: trends in PSNP transfers within
targeted households. Final report. Brighton,
UK, Institute of Development Studies and Addis
Ababa, Indak International.
Devereux, S., Sabates-Wheeler, R., Slater, R., Tefera,
M., Brown, T. & Teshome, A. 2008. Ethiopia’s PSNP:
2008 assessment report. Brighton, Institute of
Development Studies.
Dewbre, J., Daidone, S., Davis, B., Miguélez, B.,
Niang, O. & Pellerano, L. 2015. Lesotho Child
Grant Programme and Linking Food Security
to Social Protection Programme. PtoP (From
Protection to Production) project report, FAO,
Rome.
Djurfeldt, G., Holmén, H., Jirström, M. & Larsson,
R., eds. 2005. The African food crisis: lessons from
the Asian green revolution. Wallingford, UK, CAB
International Publishing.
Doretto, M. & Michellon, E. 2007. Avaliação dos
impactos econômicos, sociais e culturais do

118
Programa de Aquisição de Alimentos no Paraná.
In F.B.B. Filho & de A.D. Carvalho, eds. Avaliação
de políticas de aquisição de alimentos. 7(27):
107–138. Brasilia, Universidade de Brasília/ Centro
de Estudos Avançados Multidisciplinares/Núcleo
de Estudos Ruraris, 2007.
Dorward, A., Sabates-Wheeler, R., MacAuslan, I.,
Buckley, C.P., Kydd, J. & Chirwa, E. 2006.
Promoting agriculture for social protection or
social protection for agriculture: policy and
research issues. FAC Discussion Paper No. 002.
Brighton, UK, Future Agricultures Consortium.
Doss, C. 2011. Intrahousehold bargaining and
resource allocation in developing countries.
Background paper for the World Development
Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Doss, C., McPeak, J. & Barrett, C.B. 2008.
Interpersonal, intertemporal and spatial variation
in risk perceptions: evidence from East Africa.
World Development, 36(8): 1453–1468.
Dostie, B., Haggblade, S. & Randriamamonjy, J.
2002. Seasonal poverty in Madagascar: magnitude
and solutions. Food Policy, 27(5–6): 493–518.
Drèze, J. & Khera, R. 2013. Rural poverty and
the Public Distribution System. Centre for
Development Economics Working Paper No. 235.
New Delhi, Department of Economics, Delhi
School of Economics.
Druilhe, Z. & Barreiro-Hurlé, J. 2012. Fertilizer
subsidies in sub-Saharan Africa. ESA Working
paper No. 12–04. Rome, FAO.
Du Toit, A. & Neves, D. 2006. Vulnerability and social
protection at the margins of the formal economy.
Case studies from Khayelitsha and the Eastern
Cape. Cape Town, Programme for Land and
Agrarian Studies (PLAAS), Belville, University of
the Western Cape.
Duflo, E. 2003. Grandmothers and granddaughters:
old-age pensions and intrahousehold allocation
in South Africa. World Bank Economic Review,
17(1–25).
Dupas, P. & Robinson, J. 2009. Savings constraints
and microenterprise development: evidence from
a field experiment in Kenya. NBER Working Paper
No. 14693. Cambridge, MA, USA, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Dutta, P., Rinku, M., Ravallion, M. & van de
Walle, D. 2014. Right to work? Assessing India’s
Employment Guarantee Scheme in Bihar.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Edmonds, E. 2006. Child labor and schooling
responses to anticipated income in South
Africa. Journal of Development Economics,
81(2): 386–414.

Elbers, C., Gunning, J.W. & Kinsey, B. 2007. Growth
and risk: methodology and micro evidence.
World Bank Economic Review, 21(1): 1–20.
Elbers, C., Gunning, J.W. & Pan, L. 2009. Growing
out of poverty under risk: evidence from
rural Ethiopia. Paper presented at the CSAE
Conference 2009 on Economic Development in
Africa, 2–24 March 2009, St Catherine’s College,
Oxford, UK.
Escobal, J. & Ponce, C. 2015. Combining social
protection with economic opportunities in
rural Peru: Wiñay. Policy in Focus 11, No. 2.
International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth,
Brasilia.
EU (European Union). 2012. Communication from
the Commission to the European Parliament,
The Council, The European Economic and Social
Committee and the Committee of the Regions.
Social Protection in European Union Development
Cooperation. COM(2012) 446 final. Brussels.
EUI (European University Institute). European
Report on Development 2010. Social protection
for inclusive development. San Domenico
di Fiesole, Italy, Robert Schuman Centre for
Advanced Studies, European University Institute.
Evans, D.K. & Popova, A. 2014. Cash transfers and
temptation goods: a review of global evidence.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
No. 6886. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Evans, D.K., Hausladen, S., Kosec, K. & Reese, N.
2014. Community-based conditional cash
transfers in Tanzania: results from a randomized
trial. Washington, DC, World Bank.
FAO. 2001. Supplement to the report on the 1990
World Census of Agriculture. FAO Statistical
Development Series 9a. Rome.
FAO. 2009. The State of Food and Agriculture 2009.
Livestock in the balance. Rome.
FAO. 2011. The State of Food and Agriculture 2010–
11. Women in agriculture: closing the gender gap
for development. Rome.
FAO. 2012. The State of Food and Agriculture 2012.
Investing in agriculture for a better future. Rome.
FAO. 2013a. The State of Food and Agriculture
2013. Food systems for better nutrition. Rome.
FAO. 2013b. Alimentación escolar y las posibilidades
de compra directa de la agricultura familiar.
Estudios de caso en ocho países. Santiago de Chile.
FAO. 2014a. The State of Food and Agriculture
2014. Innovation in family farming. Rome.
FAO. 2014b. The State of World Fisheries and
Aquaculture 2014. Opportunity and challenge.
Rome.
FAO. 2015a. FAOSTAT. Online statistical database
(available at http://faostat.fao.org).

119
FAO. 2015b. Nutrition and social protection. Rome.
FAO, IFAD & WFP. 2015a. The State of Food Insecurity
in the World 2015. Meeting the 2015 international
hunger targets: taking stock of uneven progress.
Rome, FAO.
FAO, IFAD & WFP. 2015b. Achieving Zero Hunger. The
critical role of investments in social protection and
agriculture. Rome, FAO.
Farrington, J., Sharp K. & Sjoblom D. 2007. Targeting
approaches to cash transfers: comparisons
across Cambodia, India and Ethiopia. ODI Social
Protection Series. London, Overseas Development
Institute.
Fernald, L.C.H, Gertler, P.J. & Neufeld, L.M. 2008.
The importance of cash in conditional cash
transfer programs for child health, growth
and development: an analysis of Mexico’s
Oportunidades. Lancet, 371(9615): 828–837.
Fink, G., Jack, B.K. & Masiye, F. 2014. Seasonal credit
constraints and agricultural labor supply: evidence
from Zambia. NBER Working Paper No. 20218.
Cambridge MA, USA, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Fiszbein, A., Kanbur, R. & Yemtsov, R. 2013. Social
protection, poverty and the post-2015 agenda.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
No. 6469. Washington DC, World Bank.
Fiszbein, A., Kanbur, R. & Yemtsov, R. 2014.
Social protection and poverty reduction: global
patterns and some targets. World Development,
61: 167–177.
Fiszbein, A., Schady, N., Ferreira, F.H.G., Grosh, M.,
Keleher, N., Olinto, P. & Skoufias, E. 2009.
Conditional cash transfers: reducing present and
future poverty. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Gahamanyi, V., Hartwig, R. & Kettlewell, A.
2014. Evaluating graduation: insights from the
Vision 2020 Umurenge Programme in Rwanda.
Presentation made at the IDS Graduation and
Social Protection Conference on 6–8 May, 2014.
Kigali.
Gavrilovic, M., Knowles, M., Davis, B., Pozarny P. &
Calganini, G. 2015. Strengthening links between
agriculture and social protection to combat
poverty, hunger and malnutrition in Africa:
framework for analysis and action. In preparation.
Rome, FAO.
Gelli, A., Neeser, K. & Drake, L. 2010. Home grown
school feeding: linking small holder agriculture
to school food provision. HGSF Working Paper
Series No. 1. London, The Partnership for Child
Development.
Gentilini, U. & Omamo, S.W. 2009. Unveiling social
safety nets.WFP Occasional Paper No. 20. Rome,
WFP.

Gertler, P.J., Martínez, S.W. & Rubio-Codina, M.
2012. investing cash transfers to raise longterm living standards. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1): 1–32.
Ghosh, J. 2014. Social protection programmes in
India: An overview of recent experience with
different types of schemes. Paper prepared for
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations. Rome, FAO. Unpublished.
Gilligan, D.O. & Hoddinott, J. 2007. Is there
persistence in the impact of emergency food
aid? Evidence on consumption, food security,
and assets in rural Ethiopia. American Journal
of Agricultural Economics, 89(2): 225–242.
Gilligan, D.O., Hoddinott, J. & Taffesse, A.S.
2008. The impact of Ethiopia’s Productive
Safety Net Programme and its linkages. IFPRI
Discussion Paper 839. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Gilligan, D.O., Hoddinott, J., Kumar, N. &
Taffesse, A.S. 2009. An impact evaluation of
Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Nets programme.
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Girard, A.W., Self, J.L., McAuliffe, C. &
Olude, O. 2012. The effects of household
food production strategies on the health and
nutrition outcomes of women and young
children: a systematic review. Paediatric and
Perinatal Epidemiology, 26(Suppl. 1): 205–222.
Grosh, M., del Ninno, C., Tesliuc, E. & Ouerghi,
A. 2008. For protection and promotion. The
design and implementation of effective safety
nets. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Handa, S. & Davis, B. 2006. The experience of
conditional cash transfers in Latin America and
the Caribbean. Development Policy Review,
(24)5: 513–536.
Handa, S. & de Milliano, M. 2015. The impact of
social cash transfers on schooling in Africa: an
update from the Transfer Project. The Transfer
Project. Research Brief No. 2015–01. Chapel
Hill, NC, USA, Carolina Population Center,
University of North Carolina.
Handa, S., Park, M., Darko, R., Osei-Akoto, I.,
Davis, B. & Daidone. S. 2013. Livelihood
empowerment against poverty impact
evaluation. Chapel Hill, NC, USA, Carolina
Population Center, University of North Carolina.
Hashemi, S.M. & de Montesquiou, A. 2011.
Reaching the poorest: lessons from the
graduation model. CGAP Focus Note No. 69.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Haushofer, J. & Shapiro, J. 2013. Household
response to income changes: evidence from an
unconditional cash transfer program in Kenya.
Unpublished.

120
Hazell, P., Anderson, J., Balzer, N., Hastrup
Clemmensen, A., Hess, U. & Rispoli, F. 2010. The
potential for scale and sustainability in weather
index insurance for agriculture and rural
livelihoods. Rome, IFAD.
Hentschel, J., Lanjouw, J.O., Lanjouw, P. & Poggi,
J. 2000. Combining census and survey data to
study spatial dimensions of poverty: a case study
of Ecuador. In D. Bigman and H. Fofack, eds.
Geographical targeting for poverty alleviation,
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Hidrobo, M., Hoddinott, J., Kumar, N. & Olivier,
M. 2014a. Social protection and food security.
Background paper prepared for The State of
Food and Agriculture 2015: Social protection
and agriculture: breaking the cycle of rural
poverty. Washington, DC, IFPRI. Unpublished.
Hidrobo, M., Hoddinott, J., Kumar, N. &
Olivier, M. 2014b. Social protection and asset
accumulation. Background paper prepared
for The State of Food and Agriculture 2015:
Social protection and agriculture: breaking the
cycle of rural poverty. Washington DC, IFPRI.
Unpublished.
Hidrobo, M., Hoddinott, J., Peterman, A.,
Margolies, A. & Moreira, V. 2014. Cash, food,
or vouchers? Evidence from a randomized
experiment in northern Ecuador. Journal of
Development Economics, 107: 144–156.
Himanshu & Sen, A. 2013. In-kind food transfers
I: Impact on poverty reduction and nutrition.
Economic and Political Weekly, Nov 16,
Vol XLVIII, No. 45–46.
HLPE (High Level Panel of Experts on Food
Security). 2012. Social protection for food
security. A report by the High Level Panel of
Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the
Committee on World Food Security. Rome, FAO.
Hoddinott, J. & Skoufias, E. 2004. The impact
of PROGRESA on food consumption.
Economic Development and Cultural Change,
53(1): 37–61.
Hoddinott, J., Skoufias, E. & Washburn, R. 2000.
The impact of PROGRESA on consumption: a
final report. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Hoddinott, J., Alderman, H., Behrman, J.R.,
Haddad, L. & Horton, S. 2013. The economic
rationale for investing in stunting reduction.
Maternal and Child Nutrition, 9(Suppl. 2):
69–82.
Hoddinott, J., Berhane, G., Gilligan, D.O.,
Kumar, N. & Taffesse, A.S. 2012. The impact of
Ethiopia’s productive safety net programme and
related transfers on agricultural productivity.
Journal of African Economies, 21(5): 761–786.

Holmes, R. & Jones, N. 2013. Gender and social
protection in the developing world: beyond
mothers and safety nets. London, Zed Books.
Holmes, R., Jones, N., Presler-Marshall, E. &
Stavropoulou, M. 2014. The linkages between
social protection, gender and agricultural growth.
Background paper prepared for The State of
Food and Agriculture 2015: Social protection
and agriculture: breaking the cycle of rural
poverty. London, Overseas Development Institute.
Unpublished.
Holmes, R., Mannan, F., Dhali, H.H. & Parveen, S.
2010. Gendered risks, poverty and vulnerability
in Bangladesh. Case study of the challenging the
frontiers of poverty reduction programme (CFPR),
Specially Targeted Ultra Poor II (STUP II). London,
Overseas Development Institute.
Holzmann, R. & Jørgensen, S. 2000. Social risk
management: a new conceptual framework for
social protection and beyond. Social Protection
Discussion Paper Series, No. 0006. Human
Development Network. Washington, DC, World
Bank.
Hunt, J.M. 2005. The potential impact of reducing
global malnutrition on poverty reduction and
economic development. Asia Pacific Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 14(Suppl.): 10–38.
Iannotti, L., Cunningham, K. & Ruel, M. 2009.
Improving diet quality and micronutrient
nutrition: homestead food production in
Bangladesh. IFPRI Discussion Paper No. 00928.
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2011. Evidence
and lessons from impact evaluations on social
safety nets. Washington, DC, World Bank.
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural
Development). 2010. Rural Poverty Report 2011.
New realities, new challenges: new opportunities
for tomorrow’s generation. Rome.
IFAD & WFP. 2011. Weather index-based insurance
in agricultural development. A technical guide.
Rome, IFAD.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2011.
Social Protection Floor for a fair and inclusive
globalization. Report of the Advisory Group
chaired by Michelle Bachelet. Convened by the
ILO with the collaboration of the WHO. Geneva,
Switzerland.
ILO. 2014. World Social Protection Report 2014/15.
Building economic recovery, inclusive development
and social justice. Geneva, Switzerland.
ILO & WHO. 2009. The Social Protection Floor. A
joint crisis initiative of the UN Chief Executives
Board for co-ordination on the Social Protection
Floor. Geneva, Switzerland.

121
IPC-IG & WFP (International Policy Centre for
Inclusive Growth and World Food Programme).
2013. Structured demand and smallholder farmers
in Brazil: the case of PAA and PNAE. Brasilia,
International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth.
Jacoby, H. 2002. Is there an intrahousehold
‘flypaper effect’? Evidence from a school feeding
programme. Economic Journal, 112: 196–221.
Jalan, J. & Ravallion, M. 2001. Household income
dynamics in rural China. In S. Dercon, ed.
Insurance against poverty. Oxford, UK, Oxford
University Press.
Jayne, T.S. & Rashid, S. 2013. Input subsidy programs
in sub-Saharan Africa: a synthesis of recent
evidence. Agricultural Economics, 44(6): 547–562.
Jennings, M., Kayondo, A., Kagoro, J., Nicholson, K.,
Blight, N. & Gayfer, J. 2013. Impact evaluation of
the Protracted Relief Programme II, Zimbabwe.
Final report. Sheffield, UK, International
Organisation Development Ltd.
Jensen, R.T. 2003. Do private transfers ‘displace’
the benefits of public transfers? Evidence from
South Africa. Journal of Public Economics,
88(1–2): 89–112.
Jentoft, S. & Eide A., eds. 2011. Poverty mosaics:
realities and prospects in small-scale fisheries.
Dordrecht, Netherlands, Springer.
Kabeer, N. 2008. Mainstreaming gender in social
protection for the informal economy. London,
Commonwealth Secretariat.
Kagin, J., Taylor, J.E., Alfani, F. & Davis, B. 2014.
Local Economy-wide Impact Evaluation (LEWIE) of
Ethiopia’s social cash transfer pilot programme.
PtoP (From Protection to Production) project
report. Rome, FAO.
Kain, J., Uauy, R. & Taibo, M. 2002. Chile’s school
feeding programme: targeting experience.
Nutrition Research, 22: 599–608.
Kazianga, H., de Walque, D. & Alderman, H.
2014. School feeding programs, intrahousehold
allocation and the nutrition of siblings: evidence
from a randomized trial in rural Burkina Faso.
Journal of Development Economics, 106: 15–34.
Kenya CT-OVC Evaluation Team. 2012. The impact
of Kenya’s cash transfer for orphans and
vulnerable children on human capital. Journal of
Development Effectiveness, 4(1): 38–49.
Khandker, S.R. & Samad, H.A. 2014. Dynamic
effects of microcredit in Bangladesh. World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6821.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Khandker, S., Bakht, Z. & Koolwal, G. 2006. The
poverty impact of rural roads: evidence from
Bangladesh. Policy Research Working Paper
No. 3875. Washington, DC, World Bank.

Khera, R. & Nayak, N. 2009. Women workers and
perceptions of the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act. Economic and Political Weekly,
44(43): 49–57.
Kilic, T., Whitney, E. & Winters, P. 2015. Decentralised
beneficiary targeting in large-scale development
programmes: insights from the Malawi Farm
Input Subsidy Programme. Journal of African
Economies, 24(1): 26–56.
Krishna, A. 2004. Escaping poverty and becoming
poor: who gains, who loses, and why? World
Development, 32(1): 121–136.
Krishna, A., Kristjanson, P., Radeny, M. & Nindo, W.
2004. Escaping poverty and becoming poor
in twenty Kenyan villages. Journal of Human
Development, 5: 211–26.
Krishna, A., Lumonya, D., Markiewicz, M.,
Mugumya, F., Kafuko, A. & Wegoye, J. 2006.
Escaping poverty and becoming poor in 36 village
of Central and Western Uganda. Journal of
Development Studies, 42(2): 346–370.
Kristjansson, E.A., Robinson, V., Petticrew, M.,
MacDonald, B., Krasevec, J., Janzen, L.,
Greenhalgh, T., Wells, G., MacGowan, J.,
Farmer, A., Shea, B.J., Mayhew, A. & Tugwell, P.
2006. School feeding for improving the physical
and psychosocial health of disadvantaged
students. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 2006: 14.
Landim, P. 2009. Os efeitos do Programa Bolsa
Família sobre a economia dos municípios
Brasileiros. São Paulo, Brazil, Instituto de Ensino e
Pesquisa.
Leibbrandt, M., Woolard, I., Finn, A. & Argentet, J.
2010. Trends in South African Income distribution
and poverty since the fall of Apartheid. OECD
Social, Employment and Migration Working Paper
No. 101. Paris, OECD Publishing.
Lentz, E. & Barrett, C. 2005. Food aid targeting,
shocks and private transfers among East African
pastoralists. Cornell University Working Paper.
Ithaca, Cornell University.
Lichand, G. 2010. Decomposing the effects of CCTs
on entrepreneurship. World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper No. 5457. Washington, DC, World
Bank.
Lindert, K., Linder, A., Hobbs, J. & de la Brière, B.
2007. The nuts and bolts of Brazil’s Bolsa Família
Program: implementing conditional cash
transfers in a decentralized context. World Bank
Social Protection Discussion Paper No. 0709.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Lucena, E.K. & Luiz, J.M. 2009. Uma Avaliação
da Importância do Programa de Aquisição de
Alimentos. Paper presented at the Sociedade
Brasileira de Economia, Administração e

122
Sociologia Rural, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil, 26–30
July, 2009.
Lunduka, R., Ricker-Gilbert, J. & Fisher, M. 2013.
What are the farm-level impacts of Malawi’s
farm input subsidy program? A critical review.
Agricultural Economics, 44(6): 563–579.
Mahaptra, R., Sakhuja, V., Das, S. & Singh, S. 2008.
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act:
opportunities and challenges. New Delhi, Natural
Resource Management and Livelihood Unit,
Centre for Science and Environment.
Mahul, O. & Stutley, C.J. 2010. Government support
to agricultural insurance. Challenges and options
for developing countries. Washington, DC, World
Bank.
Maluccio, J.A. 2010. The impact of conditional
cash transfers on consumption and investment
in Nicaragua. Journal of Development Studies,
46(1): 14–38.
Maluccio, J. & Flores, R. 2005. Impact evaluation
of a conditional cash transfer programme: The
Nicaraguan Red de Protección Social. IFPRI
Research Report 141. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Manley, J., Gitter, S. & Slavchevska, V. 2013.
How effective are cash transfers at improving
nutritional status. World Development,
48: 133–155.
Martínez, S. 2004. Pensions, poverty and household
investments in Bolivia. Doctoral dissertation.
Berkeley, USA, University of California.
Mason, N.M., Jayne, T.S. & Mofya-Mukuka, R. 2013.
Zambia’s input subsidy programs. Agricultural
Economics, 44(6): 613–628.
McCord, A. 2012. Public works and social protection
in sub-Saharan Africa. Do public works work for
the poor? Cape Town, South Africa, Juta Press.
Meherette, E. 2009. Innovations in insuring the
poor: providing weather index and indemnity
insurance in Ethiopia. 2020 Vision for Food,
Agriculture and the Environment, Focus 17, Brief
8, December 2009. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Merttens, F., Hurrell, A., Marzi, M., Attah, R.,
Farhat, M., Kardan, A. & MacAuslan, I. 2013.
Kenya Hunger Safety Net Programme Monitoring
and Evaluation Component. Impact evaluation
final report: 2009 to 2012. Oxford, UK, Oxford
Policy Management.
Mills, D.J., Westlund, L., de Graaf, G., Willmann, R.,
Kura, Y. & Kelleher, K. 2011. Under-reported
and undervalued: small-scale fisheries in the
developing world. In N.L. Andrew & R. Pomeroy,
eds. Small-scale fisheries management:
frameworks and approaches for the developing
world. Wallingford, UK, CAB International
Publishing.

Ministerio de Desarrollo e Inclusión Social, Gobierno
del Perú. 2012. Lineamiento para la focalización
de intervenciones para el desarrollo productivo y
la generación y diversificación de ingresos de la
población en proceso de inclusión. Perú, Directiva
No. 006-2012 MIDIS.
MORD (Ministry of Rural Development,
Government of India). 2013. Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
Report to the People. New Delhi, Ministry of Rural
Development, Government of India.
Moretti, D., Zimmermann, M.B., Muthayya, S.,
Thankachan, P., Lee, T.C., Kurpad, A.V. &
Hurrell, R.F. 2006. Extruded rice fortified with
micronized ground ferric pyrophosphate reduces
iron deficiency in Indian schoolchildren: a doubleblind randomized controlled trial. The American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 84(4): 822–829.
Mostafa, J. & Sátyro, N.G.D. 2014. Cadastro Único:
a registry supported by a national public bank.
IPC-IG–UNDP Working Paper No. 126. Brasilia,
International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth–
United Nations Development Programme.
Murphy, S.P., Gewa, C., Liang, L.J., Grillenberger, M.,
Bwibo, N.O. & Neumann, C.G. 2003. School snacks
containing animal source foods improve dietary
quality for children in rural Kenya. The Journal of
Nutrition, 133(11 Suppl. 2): 3950S–3956S.
Naqvi, F. 2013. Pakistan National Cash Transfer
Programme. DFID support to the Benazir Income
Support Programme (2012–2020). Presentation
made at the Transforming Cash Transfers
Symposium, 16–17 October. London, Overseas
Development Institute.
Naschold, F. 2012. “The poor stay poor”. Household
asset poverty traps in rural semi-arid India. World
Development, 40(10): 2033–2043.
Nehring, R., Miranda, A.C. & Howe, A. 2014. A case
for institutional demand. Support for smallholders
through procurement and food assistance
programmes. Background paper prepared for
The State of Food and Agriculture 2015: Social
protection and agriculture: breaking the cycle
of rural poverty. International Policy Centre for
Inclusive Growth. Unpublished.
Neumann, C.G., Bwibo, N.O., Murphy, S.P.,
Sigman, M., Whaley, S., Allen, L.H., Guthrie, D.,
Weiss, R.E. & Demment, M.W. 2003. Animal source
foods improve dietary quality, micronutrient
status, growth and cognitive function in Kenyan
school children: background, study design and
baseline findings. The Journal of Nutrition,
133(11 Suppl. 2): 3941S–3949S.
Okola, A. 2011. Mainstreaming gender in rural
roads programs: the experience of Peru and

123
its applicability for Africa. PowerPoint slide
presentation.
Omilola, B. & Kaniki, S. 2014. Social protection in
Africa: A review of potential contribution and
impact on poverty reduction. UNDP Study Report.
New York, USA, United Nations Development
Programme.
OPM (Oxford Policy Management). 2013a.
Qualitative research and analyses of the
economic impact of cash transfer programmes in
sub-Saharan Africa. Ghana Country Case Study
Report. Paper prepared for the From Protection
to Production project. Rome, FAO.
OPM. 2013b. Qualitative research and analyses
of the economic impact of cash transfer
programmes in sub-Saharan Africa. Kenya
Country Case Study Report. Paper prepared
for the From Protection to Production project.
Rome, FAO.
OPM. 2014. Qualitative research and analyses of the
economic impacts of cash transfer programmes in
sub-Saharan Africa. Malawi Country Case Study
Report. Oxford, Oxford Policy Management.
PAA (Purchase from Africans for Africa). 2014.
Purchase from Africans for Africa. Phase I
learning and results report (available at http://
paa-africa.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/
Report-Phase-I_low.pdf).
Pahlowan, W.I. & Samaranayake, S. 2014. An end
in sight for ultra-poverty: scaling up BRAC’s
graduation model for the poorest. Presentation
made at the IDS Graduation and Social Protection
Conference on 6–8 May, 2014. Kigali.
Pankaj, A. & Tankha, R. 2010. Empowerment effects
of the NREGS on women workers: a study in four
states. Economic and Political Weekly, 45(30): 45–55.
Pavanello, S., Pozarny, P. & de la O Campos, A.P.
2015. Research on rural women’s economic
empowerment and social protection. Rwanda
Vision 2020 Umurenge Public Works. Qualitative
report. Unpublished.
Pellerano, L., Moratti, M., Jakobsen, M., Bajgar, M.
& Barca, V. 2014. Child Grants Programme impact
evaluation. Follow-up report. Oxford, UK, Oxford
Policy Management.
Plavgo, I., de Milliano, M. & Handa, S. 2013. The
cost of social cash transfer programs in subSaharan Africa. The Transfer Project Research
Brief. Chapel Hill, NC, USA, Carolina Population
Center, University of North Carolina.
Portela Souza, A., Duarte, J., de Anchieta Semedo
Neves, J., Portela de Oliveira, P. & de Brito
Gadelha, S. 2013. Uma Investigação sobre a
focalização do Programa Bolsa Família e seus
determinantes imediatos. Center for Applied

Microeconomics Working Paper. São Paulo,
Brazil, São Paulo School of Economics.
Quisumbing, A.R., Kumar, N. & Behrman, J. 2011.
Do shocks affect men’s and women’s assets
differently? A review of literature and new
evidence from Bangladesh and Uganda. IFPRI
Discussion Paper No. 01113. Washington, DC,
IFPRI.
Quisumbing, A.R., Meinzen-Dick, R., Raney, T.L.,
Croppenstedt, A., Behrman, J.A. & Peterman, A.,
eds. 2014. Gender in agriculture: closing the
knowledge gap. Dordrecht, Netherlands, FAO
and Springer.
Rabbani, M., Prakash, V.A. & Sulaiman, M. 2006.
Impact assessment of CFPR/TUP: A descriptive
analysis based on 2002–2005 panel data. CFPR/
TUP Working Paper No. 12. Dhaka, BRAC, and
Ottawa, Aga Khan Foundation Canada.
Ranchhod, V. 2006. The effect of the South
African old age pension on labour supply of
the elderly. South African Journal of Economics,
74(4): 725–744.
Rashid, S., Dorosh, P.A., Malek, M. & Lemma, S.
2013. Modern input promotion in sub-Saharan
Africa: insights from Asian green revolution.
Agricultural Economics, 44(6): 705–721.
Ravallion, M. 2009. How relevant is targeting to the
success of an antipoverty program? World Bank
Research Observer, 24(2): 205–231.
Rawlins, R., Pimkina, S., Barrett, C.B., Pedersen, S. &
Wydick, B. 2014. Got milk? The impact of Heifer
International’s livestock donation programs in
Rwanda on nutritional outcomes. Food Policy,
44: 202–213.
Reddy, D.N., Upendranadh, C., Tankha, R. &
Sharma, A.N. 2011. Institutions and innovations
in the implementation process of the Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme in India. Centre for Social Protection
Research Report 09. Brighton, UK, Institute of
Development Studies.
Ribas, R.P. & Soares, F.V. 2011. Is the effect of
conditional transfers on labor supply negligible
everywhere? Paper presented at the 6th IZA/
World Bank Conference on Employment and
Development, June 2011, Mexico City.
Romeo, A., Dewbre, J., Davis, B. & Handa, S. 2015.
The long term impacts of cash transfers in the
context of inflation. The case of the CT-OVC
programme in Kenya. PtoP (From Protection to
Production) project report. Rome, FAO.
Rosenzweig, M. & Binswanger, H. 1993. Wealth,
weather, risk and the composition and
profitability of agricultural investment. Economic
Journal, 103(416): 56–78.

124
Ruel, M. & Alderman, H. 2013. Nutrition-sensitive
interventions and programs: how can they help
accelerate progress in improving maternal and
child nutrition? The Lancet, 382(9891): 536–551.
Ruiz-Arranz, M., Davis, B., Stampini, M.,
Winters, P. & Handa, S. 2002. More
calories or more diversity? An econometric
evaluation of the impact of the PROGRESA
and PROCAMPO transfer programs on food
security in rural Mexico. ESA Working Paper
No. 09-02. Rome, FAO.
Sabates-Wheeler, R. & Devereux, S. 2011.
Transforming livelihoods for resilient futures:
how to facilitate graduation in social protection
programmes. FAC Working Paper No. 023.
Brighton, UK, Future Agricultures Consortium.
Sabates-Wheeler, R. & Devereux, S. 2014.
Sustainable graduation: building resilient lives
and resilient systems. Paper presented at the
conference Graduation and Social Protection,
Kigali, 6–8 May 2014.
Sabates-Wheeler R., Hurrell A. & Devereux S.
2014. Targeting social transfer programmes:
Comparing design and implementation errors
across alternative mechanisms. WIDER Working
Paper 2014/040. Helsinki, World Institute for
Development Economics Research.
Sadler, K., Mitchard, E., Abdi, A., Shiferaw, Y.,
Bekele, G. & Catley, A. 2012. Milk matters: the
impact of dry season livestock support on milk
supply and child nutrition in Somali Region,
Ethiopia. Somerville, MA, USA, Feinstein
International Center, Tufts University, and Addis
Ababa, Save the Children.
SASSA (South African Social Security Agency).
2011. Third quarter indicator report. October to
December 2011. Pretoria.
SASSA. 2015. A statistical summary of social
grants in South Africa. Fact sheet. Issue No. 5 of
2015 – 31 May 2015. Pretoria.
Save the Children. 2009. How cash transfers can
improve the nutrition of the poorest children:
evaluation of a safety net project in southern
Niger. London, Save the Children.
Seyoum, Z. 2012. National experience on
gender responsive program contribution for
empowerment of rural women in Ethiopia:
the case of Productive Safety Net Programme
(PSNP). Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Ministry of Agriculture, Women’s Affairs
Directorate. Presentation prepared for the
Expert Group Meeting on Gender Responsive
Social Protection in South-East Asia, Bangkok,
Thailand, 13–14 November 2012.

Shariff A. 2009. Putting people to work: what can
we learn from India’s mass employment scheme?
New Delhi, IFPRI.
Skoufias, E. 2005. PROGRESA and its impacts on
the welfare of rural households in Mexico. IFPRI
Research Report 139. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Skoufias, E. & Parker, S.W. 2001. Conditional
cash transfers and their impact on child work
and schooling: evidence from the PROGRESA
program in Mexico. Economia, 2(1): 45–86.
Skoufias, E., Unar, M. & González-Cossío, T. 2008.
The impacts of cash and in-kind transfers on
consumption and labor supply: Experimental
evidence from rural Mexico. World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper No. 4778.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Slater R. & Farrington J. 2009. Targeting of social
transfers: a review for DFID. London, Overseas
Development Institute.
Slater, R., Ashley, S., Tefera, M., Buta, M. &
Esubalwe, D. 2006. Ethiopia Productive Safety
Net Programme (PSNP): study on policy,
programme and institutional linkages. Final
Report. London, Overseas Development
Institute, IDL group and Indak International.
Slater, R., Holmes, R., Farrington, J., McCord, A.
& Hagen-Zanker, J. 2010. Linking agriculture
and social protection toolbox. A2: Concepts and
framework. London, ODI.
Soares, S. 2012. Bolsa Família: A summary of its
impacts. International Policy Centre for Inclusive
Growth One pager No. 137. Brasilia, IPC-IG.
Soares, F.V., Ribas, R.P. & Hirata, G.I. 2008.
Achievements and shortfalls of conditional
cash transfers: impact evaluation of Paraguay’s
Tekoporã Programme. IPC Evaluation Note
No. 3. Brasilia, IPC-UNDP.
Sparovek, G., Plata, L.A.E., Maule, R.F., Maule, F.E.,
Klug, F.S.F., Klug, I.L.F., Goldszmidt, R.,
Fernandes, R.L., de Camargo, R.A. & Martins, S.P.
2007. Estudo comparativo das diferentes
modalidades do PAA – Região Nordeste.
Revista Cadernos de Estudos -Desenvolvimento
Social em Debate no 5. Brasilia, Ministério do
Desenvolvimento Social e Combate à Fome.
Strauss, J. & Thomas, D. 1998. Health, nutrition
and economic development. Journal of
Economic Literature, 36(2): 766–817.
Studdert, L.J., Soekirman, Rasmussen, K.M.
& Habicht, J.-P. 2004. Community-based
school feeding during Indonesia’s economic
crisis: implementation, benefits, and
sustainability. Food and Nutrition Bulletin,
25(2): 156–165.

125
Subbarao, K., del Ninno, C., Andrews, C. &
Rodríguez-Alas, C. 2013. Public works as a safety
net. Design, evidence, and implementation.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Sumberg, J. & Lankoandé, G.D. 2013. Heiferin-trust, social protection and graduation:
conceptual issues and empirical questions.
Development Policy Review, 31(3): 255–271.
Sumberg, J. & Sabates-Wheeler, R. 2010. Linking
agricultural development to school feeding.
HGSF Working Paper Series No. 2. London, The
Partnership for Child Development.
Swensson, L.F.J. 2015. Institutional procurement of
food from smallholder farmers: the case of Brazil.
Rome, FAO.
Taylor, J.E. 2013. A methodology for local economywide impact evaluation (LEWIE) of cash transfers.
Methodological guidelines for the From
Protection to Production Project. Rome, FAO.
Taylor, J.E. & Filipski, M.J. 2012. Beyond
experiments: simulation methods for impact
evaluation. In preparation.
Taylor, J.E., Dyer, G.A. & Yúnez-Naude, D. 2005.
Disaggregated rural economy-wide models
for policy analysis. World Development,
33(10): 1671–1688.
Taylor, J.E., Thome, K. & Filipski, M. 2013. Evaluating
local general equilibrium impacts of Lesotho’s
Child Grants Programme. PtoP (From Protection to
Production) project report. Rome, FAO.
Taylor, J.E., Kagin, J., Filipski, M. & Thome., K. 2013.
Evaluating general equilibrium impacts of Kenya’s
cash transfer program for orphans and vulnerable
children (CT-OVC). PtoP (From Protection to
Production) project report. Rome, FAO.
Taylor, J.E., Thome, K., Davis, B., Seidenfeld, D.
& Handa, S. 2014. Evaluating local general
equilibrium impacts of Zimbabwe’s Harmonized
Social Cash Transfer Programme (HSCT). PtoP
(From Protection to Production) project report.
Rome, FAO.
Teixeira, C.G. 2010. A heterogeneity analysis of
the Bolsa Família programme effect on men and
women’s work supply. IPC-IG–UNDP Working
Paper No. 61. Brasilia, International Policy
Centre for Inclusive Growth United Nations
Development Programme.
Teruel, G. & Davis, B. 2000. An evaluation of
the impact of PROGRESA cash payments on
private inter-household transfers. Final report.
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Thome, K., Taylor, J.E., Tsoka, M., Mvula, P., Davis, B.
& Handa, S. 2015. Local Economy-wide Impact
Evaluation (LEWIE) of Malawi’s Social Cash

Transfer (SCT) Programme. PtoP (From Protection
to Production) project report. Rome, FAO.
Thorne, K., Taylor, J.E., Kagin, J., Davis, B., Darko
Osei, R. & Osei-Akoto, I. 2014. Local Economywide Impact Evaluation (LEWIE) of Ghana’s
Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty
(LEAP) programme. PtoP (From Protection to
Production) project report. Rome, FAO.
Tiberti, L., Maisonnave, H., Chitiga, M., Mabugu, R.,
Robichaud, V. & Ngandu, S. 2013. The economywide impacts of the South African Child Support
Grant: a micro-simulation-computable general
equilibrium analysis. Centre Interuniversitaire sur
le Risque, les Politiques Économiques et l’Emploi.
Cahier de recherche/Working Paper No. 13-03.
Montreal, Université Laval, CIRPÉE.
Tirivayi, N., Knowles, M. & Davis, B. 2013. The
interaction between social protection and
agriculture: a review of evidence. PtoP (From
Protection to Production) report. Rome, FAO.
Todd, J.E., Winters, P.C. & Hertz, T. 2010. Conditional
cash transfers and agricultural production. Lessons
from the Oportunidades experience in Mexico.
Journal of Development Studies, 46(1): 39–67.
UN (United Nations). 2011a. The Millennium
Development Goals Report 2011. New York, USA.
UN. 2011b. Emerging issues: social protection.
Note by the Secretariat. Economic and Social
Council. Commission for Social Development,
Forty-ninth session, 9–18 February 2011, Item
3 (c) of the provisional agenda, Follow-up to
the World Summit for Social Development and
the twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly, E/CN.5/2011/1. New York, USA.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme).
2013. Social protection, growth and
employment. Evidence from India, Kenya,
Malawi, Mexico and Tajikistan. New York, USA.
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2012.
Integrated social protection systems: enhancing
equity for children. UNICEF Social Protection
Strategic Framework. New York, USA.
UNICEF. 2014. Underweight disparities by residence
and wealth quintile. Data set (available at http://
data.unicef.org/nutrition/malnutrition). Last
accessed: July 2015.
USAID. 2012. Real impact: Ethiopia, Productive
Safety Net Program Plus (available at www.usaid.
gov/sites/default/files/documents/1865/PSNP_
Plus_Real_Impact_Case_Example_030614_508.
pdf). Last accessed: July 2015.
Vaitla, B., Devereux, S. & Swan, S.H. 2009. Seasonal
hunger: a neglected problem with proven
solutions. PLoS Medicine, 6(6): e1000101.

126
Vakis, R., Rigolini, J. & Lucchetti, L. 2015. Left
behind: chronic poverty in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Van Campenhout, B. & Dercon, S. 2012. Nonlinear
dynamics of livestock assets: evidence from
Ethiopia. IFPRI Discussion Paper 01215,
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Van den Bold, M., Quisumbing, A.R. & Gillespie, S.
2013. Women’s empowerment and nutrition. An
evidence review. IFPRI Discussion Paper 01294.
Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Van Jaarsveld, P.J., Faber, M., Tanumihardjo, S.A.,
Nestel, P., Lombard, C.J. & Benadé, A.J.S. 2005.
ß-carotene-rich orange-fleshed sweet potato
improves the vitamin A status of primary school
children assessed with the modified-relative doseresponse test. The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 81(5): 1080–1087.
Vogt, S.P.C. & de Souza, R.S. 2009. Mercados
institucionais locais como instrumento de
fortalecimento da agricultura familiar: uma análise
do Programa de Aquisição de Alimentos na Região
Celeiro, RS. Paper presented at the Sociedade
Brasileira de Economia, Administração e Sociologia
Rural, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil, 26–30 July, 2009.
Ward, P., Hurrell, A., Visram, A., Riemenschneider, N.,
Pellerano, L., O’Brien, C., MacAuslan, I. &
Willis, J. 2010. Cash Transfer Programme for
Orphans and for Vulnerable Children (CT –OVC)
operational and impact evaluation 2007–2009.
Final report. Oxford, UK, Oxford Policy
Management.
WFP (World Food Programme). 2013. State of
School Feeding Worldwide 2013. Rome.
WFP. 2014. Purchase for Progress (P4P) final
consolidated procurement report (September
2008–December 2013). Rome.
Winters, P. & Davis, B. 2009. Designing a programme
to support smallholder agriculture in Mexico.
Lessons from PROCAMPO and Oportunidades.
Development Policy Review, 27(5): 617–642.
Woldehanna, T. 2009. Productive safety net
programme and children’s time use between
work and schooling in Ethiopia. Working Paper
No. 40. Oxford, UK, Young Lives, Department
of International Development, University of
Oxford.
World Bank. 2001. World Development Report
2000/2001. Attacking poverty. New York, USA,
Oxford University Press.
World Bank. 2006. Repositioning nutrition as central
to development: a strategy for large scale action.
Directions in Development. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2007. World Development Report 2008.
Agriculture for development. Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2009. Gender in agriculture.
Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2010. Global Economic Prospects 2010.
Crisis, finance, and growth. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2012. Managing risk, promoting growth.
Developing systems for social protection in Africa.
The World Bank’s Africa social protection strategy
2012–2022. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2014. The State of Social Safety Nets
2014. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2015a. Povcalnet. Online analysis tool
for global poverty monitoring (available at: http://
iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/index.htm.) Last
accessed July 2015.
World Bank. 2015b. Ending poverty and hunger
by 2030. An agenda for the global food system.
Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2015c. World Development Indicators
database (available at http://datacatalog.worldbank.
org/). Last accessed: July 2015.
World Bank. 2015d. The State of Social Safety Nets
2015. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2015e. ASPIRE: The Atlas of Social
Protection Indicators of Resilience and Equity.
Online database (available at http://datatopics.
worldbank.org/aspire/). Last accessed: July 2015.
World Bank & ONE. 2014. Levelling the field.
improving opportunities for women farmers in
Africa. Washington, DC, World Bank.
World Bank, FAO & WorldFish. 2012. Hidden harvest.
The global contribution of capture fisheries. World
Bank, Report No. 66469-GLB, Washington, DC,
World Bank.
Yoong, J., Rabinovich, L. & Diepeveen, S. 2012. The
impact of economic resource transfers to women
versus men: a systematic review. Technical report.
London, EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit,
Institute of Education, University of London.
Yoshida, N., Uematsu, H. & Sobrado, C. 2014. Is
extreme poverty going to end? An analytical
framework to evaluate progress in ending extreme
poverty. Policy Research Working Paper No. 6740.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Zezza, A., Davis, B., Azzarri, C., Covarrubias, K.,
Tasciotti, L. & Anríquez, G. 2008. The impact of rising
food prices on the poor. ESA Working Paper 08–07.
Rome, FAO.
Zezza, A., Winters, P., Davis, B., Carletto, G., Covarrubias,
K., Quiñones, E., Stamoulis, K. & DiGiuseppe, S.
2007. Rural household access to assets and agrarian
institutions: a cross country comparison. Paper
prepared for presentation at the 106th seminar of the
EAAE Pro-poor development in low income countries:
Food, agriculture, trade, and environment, 25–27
October 2007, Montpellier, France.

127
Household Survey references
Some of the survey data used in Figures 5 and 6, and
Table 4 are provided by the Rural Income Generating
Activities (RIGA) project. This is a FAO project that
has created an internationally comparable database
of rural household income sources from existing
household living standards surveys for about 25
countries. Most of the surveys used by the RIGA
project were developed by national statistical offices
in conjunction the World Bank as part of its Living
Standards Measurement Study (LSMS). The data
are accessible to the public; for more details, see
http://www.fao.org/economic/riga/rural-incomegenerating-activities/en/. Survey data not provided by
the RIGA are the original household data provided
by the LSMS, available at http://microdata.worldbank.
org/index.php/catalog/lsms.
Government of Albania. 2005. Living Standards
Measurement Survey LSMS 2005. Tirana, Institute
of Statistics.
Government of Bangladesh. 2005. Household
Income and Expenditure Survey 2005. Dhaka,
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics.
Government of the Purinational State of Bolivia.
2005. Encuesta de Hogares 2005. Sucre, Instituto
Nacional de Estadística.
Government of Bulgaria. 2001. Integrated Household
Survey. Sofia, BBSS Gallup International.
Government of Cambodia. 2004. Household SocioEconomic Survey 2003–04. Phnom Penh, Ministry
of Planning-National Institute of Statistics.
Government of Ecuador. 1998. Estudio sobre las
Condiciones de Vida. Quito, Instituto Nacional de
Estadísticay Censos (INEC).
Government of Ethiopia. 2012. Ethiopian Rural
Socioeconomic Survey 2011/2012. Addis Ababa,
Central Statistical Agency.
Government of Ghana. 2005. Ghana Living
Standards Survey 5. Accra, Statistical Service.
Government of Guatemala. 2006. Encuesta
Nacional de Condiciones de Vida (ENCOVI) 2006.
Guatemala, Instituto Nacional de Estadística, INE.
Government of Indonesia. 2000. Indonesia Family
Life Survey Wave 3. Jakarta, RAND Corporation
and Lembaga Demografi of the University of
Indonesia.
Government of Kenya. 2005. Kenya Integrated
Household Budget Survey (KIHBS) 2004/05.
Nairobi, Central Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of
Planning and National Development.
Government of Madagascar. 2001. Enquête
Permanente Auprès Des Ménages, Madagascar
2001. Antananarivo, Ministère de l’Economie et
de la Planification.

Government of Malawi. 2011. Third Integrated
Household Survey. Lilongwe, National Statistical
Office.
Government of Nepal. 2003. Nepal Living Standards
Survey II 2002/03. Katmandu, Central Bureau of
Statistics.
Government of Nicaragua. 2005. Encuesta Nacional
de Hogares Sobre Medicion de Nivel de Vida
(EMNV) 2005. Managua, Instituto Nacional de
Estadísticas y Censos INEC.
Government of Niger. 2011. National Survey on
Household Living Conditions and Agriculture,
2011. Niamey, Ministry of the Economy and
Finances and National Institute of Statistics.
Government of Nigeria. 2010. General Household
Survey – Living Standards Survey. Abuja, Federal
Republic of Nigeria Federal Office of Statistics.
Government of Pakistan. 2001. Pakistan Integrated
Household Survey (PIHS) 2001. Islamabad, Federal
Bureau of Statistics.
Government of Panama. 2003. Encuesta de Niveles
de Vida 2003. Panama, Programa de Las Naciones
Unidas para el Desarrollo.
Government of Tajikistan. 2007. Tajikistan Living
Standards Measurement Survey 2007. Dushanbe,
State Statistical Agency.
Government of Uganda. 2012. The Uganda National
Panel Survey 2011/12. Kampala, Uganda Bureau
of Statistics.
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania.
2009. National Panel Survey 2009. Dar Es-Salaam,
United Republic of Tanzania National Bureau of
Statistics.
Government of Viet Nam. 2002. Viet Nam
Household Living Standard Survey 2002. Hanoi,
General Statistics Office.

128
Special chapters of
The State of Food and Agriculture

Each issue of this report since 1957 has included one or more special studies on problems
of longer-term interest. Special chapters in earlier issues have covered the following
subjects:
1957
1958
1959

1960
1961

1962
1963
1964
1966
1967
1968

1969

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984

Factors influencing the trend of food consumption
Postwar changes in some institutional factors affecting agriculture
Food and agricultural developments in Africa south of the Sahara
The growth of forest industries and their impact on the world’s forests
Agricultural incomes and levels of living in countries at different stages of
economic development
Some general problems of agricultural development in less-developed
countries in the light of postwar experience
Programming for agricultural development
Land reform and institutional change
Agricultural extension, education and research in Africa, Asia
and Latin America
The role of forest industries in the attack on economic underdevelopment
The livestock industry in less-developed countries
Basic factors affecting the growth of productivity in agriculture
Fertilizer use: spearhead of agricultural development
Protein nutrition: needs and prospects
Synthetics and their effects on agricultural trade
Agriculture and industrialization
Rice in the world food economy
Incentives and disincentives for farmers in developing countries
The management of fishery resources
Raising agricultural productivity in developing countries through
technological improvement
Improved storage and its contribution to world food supplies
Agricultural marketing improvement programmes:
some lessons from recent experience
Modernizing institutions to promote forestry development
Agriculture at the threshold of the Second Development Decade
Water pollution and its effects on living aquatic resources and fisheries
Education and training for development
Accelerating agricultural research in the developing countries
Agricultural employment in developing countries
Population, food supply and agricultural development
The Second United Nations Development Decade:
mid-term review and appraisal
Energy and agriculture
The state of natural resources and the human environment for food
and agriculture
Problems and strategies in developing regions
Forestry and rural development
Marine fisheries in the new era of national jurisdiction
Rural poverty in developing countries and means of poverty alleviation
Livestock production: a world perspective
Women in developing agriculture
Urbanization, agriculture and food systems

129
1985

Energy use in agricultural production
Environmental trends in food and agriculture
Agricultural marketing and development
1986
Financing agricultural development
1987–88 Changing priorities for agricultural science and technology
in developing countries
1989
Sustainable development and natural resource management
1990
Structural adjustment and agriculture
1991
Agricultural policies and issues: lessons from the 1980s and prospects
for the 1990s
1992
Marine fisheries and the law of the sea: a decade of change
1993
Water policies and agriculture
Forest development and policy dilemmas
1994
1995
Agricultural trade: entering a new era?
1996
Food security: some macroeconomic dimensions
1997
The agroprocessing industry and economic development
1998
Rural non-farm income in developing countries
2000
World food and agriculture: lessons from the past 50 years
2001
Economic impacts of transboundary plant pests and animal diseases
2002
Agriculture and global public goods ten years after the Earth Summit
2003–04 Agricultural biotechnology: meeting the needs of the poor?
2005
Agriculture trade and poverty: can trade work for the poor?
2006
Food aid for food security?
2007
Paying farmers for environmental services
2008
Biofuels: prospects, risks and opportunities
Livestock in the balance
2009
2010–11 Women in agriculture: closing the gender gap for development
2012
Investing in agriculture for a better future
2013
Food systems for better nutrition
2014
Innovation in family farming

OUR PRIORITIES
The FAO Strategic Objectives

Achieving FAO’s goals to end hunger and poverty is a challenging and complex task. Today,
thanks to major changes in how we do business, FAO is a fitter, flatter and more flexible
organization, whose activities are driven by five strategic objectives. The new and improved
FAO has a real chance to win the battle against hunger, malnutrition and rural poverty.

HELP ELIMINATE HUNGER, FOOD INSECURITY AND MALNUTRITION
We contribute to the eradication of hunger by facilitating policies and political
commitments to support food security and by making sure that up-to-date information
about hunger and nutrition challenges and solutions is available and accessible.
MAKE AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES MORE PRODUCTIVE AND SUSTAINABLE
We promote evidence-based policies and practices to support highly productive agricultural
sectors (crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries), while ensuring that the natural resource base
does not suffer in the process.
REDUCE RURAL POVERTY
We help the rural poor gain access to the resources and services they need – including rural
employment and social protection – to forge a path out of poverty.
ENABLE INCLUSIVE AND EFFICIENT AGRICULTURAL AND FOOD SYSTEMS
We help to build safe and efficient food systems that support smallholder agriculture and
reduce poverty and hunger in rural areas.
INCREASE THE RESILIENCE OF LIVELIHOODS TO THREATS AND CRISES
We help countries to prepare for natural and human-caused disasters by reducing their risk
and enhancing the resilience of their food and agricultural systems.

2014
2015
The State of Food
and Agriculture
Social protection and agriculture:
breaking the cycle of rural poverty

Despite significant progress in meeting the Millennium Development
Goals on poverty and hunger, almost a billion people still live in
extreme poverty (less than $1.25 per person per day) and 795 million
still suffer from chronic hunger. Much more will have to be done
to achieve the new Sustainable Development Goals on eradicating
poverty and hunger by 2030. Most of the extreme poor live in rural
areas of developing countries and depend on agriculture for their
livelihoods. They are so poor and malnourished that their families live
in a cycle of poverty that passes from generation to generation.
Many developing countries are adopting a successful new strategy
for breaking the cycle of rural poverty – combining social protection
and agricultural development. Social protection measures such as
cash benefits for widows and orphans and guaranteed public works
employment for the poor can protect vulnerable people from the
worst deprivation. It can allow households to increase and diversify
their diets. It can also help them save and invest on their own farms
and or start new businesses. Agricultural development programmes
that support small family farms in accessing markets and managing
risks can create employment opportunities that make these families
more self-reliant and resilient. Social protection and agricultural
development, working together, can break the cycle of rural poverty.

ISBN 978-92-5-108861-6

9

7 8 9 2 5 1

ISSN 0081-4539

0 8 8 6 1 6
I4910E/1/10.15

