www.gsdrc.org

Professional Development Reading Pack

No. 49

Social Protection Systems
Philip White
July 2016
A social protection system, in an international development context, is
broadly understood to be an integrated national portfolio of interventions
which aims to serve four basic functions for households and individuals:
protection of a minimum standard of living, prevention of deprivation
through increasing resilience to shocks, and promotion of sustainable
livelihood improvements. At a societal level, it may aim to bring about
transformation towards improved equity, reduced exclusion and
realization of the human right to social security. (Devereux & SabatesWheeler 2004). Social protection systems can provide one of the most
direct means for the achievement of SDG1 (‘to end poverty in all its forms
everywhere’), with a potential to contribute to several other SDGs too.
Common system components are social assistance (non-contributory
transfers in cash or kind to individuals or households in need), social
insurance (contributory schemes providing compensatory support in the
event of contingencies such as illness, injury, disability, death of a spouse
or parent, unemployment and old age), and social care services for those
facing social risks such as violence, abuse, exploitation, discrimination and
social exclusion. Labour market programmes may also be included,
whether active (promoting labour market participation) or passive
(ensuring minimum employment standards).

Philip White
(philip@rauwhite.freeserve
.co.uk) is an independent
consultant who has held
research and teaching
positions at the University
of Leeds, and at the
University of East Anglia
where he currently retains
Research Associate status.
With an agricultural
economics background, he
has recently specialised in
food security, complex
emergencies, disaster risk
reduction, and social
protection design and
value-for-money
appraisals. He has
extensive field experience
spanning more than 35
years, predominantly in
Africa and South Asia.

The last decade has seen a growing consensus among development actors
on the need to shift focus from individual social protection programmes,
often donor-funded pilots with minimal government buy-in, to the
establishment of sustainable national systems under government
ownership and coordination. A system-level approach allows resources to
be channelled to social protection policy and strategy development,
potentially avoiding gaps and overlaps in programme coverage and
improving overall coherence and cost-effectiveness. This involves
strengthening institutional capacities for coordinating management across
multiple programmes, building integrated management information
Reading packs are commissioned by the UK Government’s Department for International Development (DFID) for
independent study and professional development use. They are intended to be thought-provoking introductions to
emerging issues and debates within the subject areas they cover. The views expressed are those of the author, and do not
necessarily reflect the opinions of GSDRC, its partner agencies or DFID. © DFID Crown Copyright 2016. Licensed under the
Open Government Licence: www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence
Suggested citation: White, P. (2016). Social protection systems. GSDRC Professional Development Reading Pack no. 49.
Birmingham, UK: University of Birmingham.

systems and beneficiary registries, and system-wide assessment and evaluation. To this end,
development partners have established a Social Protection Inter-Agency Cooperation Board (SPIACB), chaired by the ILO and World Bank, to support international efforts in system promotion, policy
coherence, coordination, and knowledge sharing. SPIAC-B is developing a set of Inter-Agency Social
Protection Assessment (ISPA) tools to help countries analyse and improve their social protection
system.
Related to this has been recognition on the part of development partners of the need to move
beyond support for fragmented, time-bound ‘safety nets’ tightly targeted to the ‘extreme poor’ and
often conditioned on prescribed beneficiary behaviours, towards the broader goal of universal,
legally guaranteed entitlement to a minimum level of social protection. This generally envisages
access to essential health care, including maternity care, and basic income security for children, for
persons of active age who are unable to work (e.g. through sickness, maternity, disability, or
unemployment), and for older persons, as specified in the 2012 ILO-adopted Social Protection Floor
Recommendation (No. 202). Nevertheless, debates continue on the relative merits of these two
approaches. On the one hand concentrating limited resources on the extreme poor can, in principle,
maximise cost-effectiveness in reducing poverty and inequality but it is subject to high inclusion and
exclusion errors, manipulation by elites and social divisiveness. On the other hand, a more universal
approach that addresses lifecycle vulnerabilities across categorically-defined population groups
involves higher overall costs, but avoids targeting drawbacks, providing more secure entitlements
and excluding fewer vulnerable people. While many low and lower-middle income countries aspire
to a universal social protection floor, in practice most have yet to identify revenue generation to
cover the 2.5-5% of GDP that would make it fiscally sustainable. However, a social protection floor
can potentially deepen the ‘state-citizen contract’, engendering wider political support both for
extending social security provision and for its financing through domestic taxation.
Ultimately, the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a social protection system will depend on the
integrity of its institutional arrangements and implementation systems, and, it is often argued, on its
ability to generate positive growth, productivity and employment spinoff effects. While attempts to
reduce caseloads by ‘graduating’ beneficiaries into productive enterprises often fail to take account
of shocks and labour constraints, evidence is accumulating that social protection can, over the
longer term, boost household livelihood investments, improve resilience and enhance the lifechances of future generations, as well as generate significant multiplier impacts in the local
economy.

Key readings
Reading 1: Bastagli, F. (2015). Bringing taxation into social protection analysis and planning. ODI
working paper 421. London: Overseas Development Institute.
https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/9700.pdf

Reading 2: Devereux, S. & Sabates-Wheeler, R. (2004). Transformative social protection. IDS working
paper 232. Brighton: Institute of Development Studies. http://www.ids.ac.uk/files/dmfile/Wp232.pdf
Reading 3: Hickey, S. (2011). The politics of social protection: what do we get from a ‘social contract’
approach? CPRC working paper 216. Manchester, UK: Chronic Poverty Research Centre, University of
Manchester. http://www.chronicpoverty.org/uploads/publication_files/WP216%20Hickey.pdf

2

Reading 4: Kidd, S. (2015). The political economy of “targeting” of social security schemes. Pathways’
perspectives on social policy in international development 19. Orpington, UK: Development
Pathways. http://www.developmentpathways.co.uk/resources/the-political-economy-of-targeting-of-socialsecurity-schemes/

Reading 5: Robalino D., Rawlings, L., & Walker, I. (2012). Building social protection and labor
systems: Concepts and operational implications. Background paper for the World Bank 2012-2022
social protection and labor strategy. World Bank discussion paper 1202. Washington D.C.: World
Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/SOCIALPROTECTION/Resources/SP-Discussion-papers/4305781331508552354/1202.pdf

Reading 6: White, P., Hodges, A. & Greenslade, M. (2015). Measuring and maximising value for
money in social protection systems. London: DFID.
http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/pdf/outputs/ChronicPoverty/61479_ValueForMoneyInSocialProtectionSystems_24Nov2
015.pdf

Questions to guide reading
1. What specific objectives have motivated governments to build and expand social protection
systems in different low and lower middle income contexts, and what main challenges do they
face in each case?
2. What is the state of evidence on the different impacts ascribed to social protection in low and
lower middle income countries? How important is evidence of impact and cost-effectiveness in
social protection policy processes?
3. What are the advantages and risks associated with moving from a programme to a system
focused approach to social protection?
4. How can social protection systems be sustainably financed in the medium to long term?
5. How can functional linkages between social assistance and social insurance best be established
in low to lower middle income countries, so that social insurance is extended beyond formal
sector employment?
6. What are the most appropriate roles for development partners in social protection system
development?

Further reading
Browne, E. (2015). Social protection topic guide. Birmingham, UK: GSDRC, University of Birmingham.
http://www.gsdrc.org/topic-guides/social-protection/

Hinds, R. (2014) Defining social protection systems. (GSDRC Helpdesk Research Report 1085).
Birmingham, UK: GSDRC, University of Birmingham. http://www.gsdrc.org/docs/open/hdq1085.pdf
The Transfer Project. (2014). The broad range of cash transfer impacts in sub-Saharan Africa:
Consumption, human capital and productive activity. Research brief. Chapel Hill NC: UNC Carolina
Population Center. https://transfer.cpc.unc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/TransferProjectBrief_201401_BroadImpactsofSCT.pdf

3

