18. Gender and social protection
Nicola Jones

18.1

INTRODUCTION

Social protection programmes seek to reduce vulnerability and poverty and promote individual, household and community resilience to shocks and stresses by improving household
income and access to services. Cash and asset transfers and public works programmes have
spread rapidly across low- and middle-income countries since the mid-1990s (ILO 2017),
reaching millions of people (Barrientos et al. 2010; Molyneux et al. 2016). However, feminist
analysts have highlighted that social protection has paid inadequate attention to the gendered
patterning of risks and vulnerabilities throughout the life cycle, so it is ‘yet to fully realise
its potential to address the underlying causes of vulnerability and the drivers of inequality to
achieve social justice and socially equitable outcomes’ (Holmes and Jones 2013, 2). There is
growing consensus that for social protection to evolve beyond safety net provision and have
a more transformative impact, it must go beyond a narrow focus on women in their capacity
as mothers and instead support women’s and girls’ empowerment and gender equality more
explicitly and strategically across the life cycle (Molyneux 2007; Holmes and Jones 2013;
Cookson 2018; Holmes et al. 2019).
This chapter focuses on the gender dimensions of social protection design and implementation in lower- and middle-income countries. It summarizes available evidence on the extent to
which social protection – from cash and asset transfers to public works programmes and social
insurance schemes – is promoting girls’ and women’s empowerment and gender equality.
Section 18.2 provides an overview of gender-specific risks and vulnerabilities facing girls
and boys, and men and women, over the life cycle, and the gendered coping strategies they
employ. Section 18.3 discusses the extent to which gender-specific risks and vulnerabilities
are typically embedded within programme design. Section 18.4 focuses on the gender dimensions of programme implementation and impacts on people’s lives, also discussing the role of
the politics of gender-responsive social protection in shaping programmatic outcomes in specific contexts. Section 18.5 concludes the chapter by reflecting on priorities for strengthening
gender-responsive social protection programming.

18.2

GENDER-SPECIFIC RISKS, VULNERABILITIES AND
COPING PATTERNS ACROSS THE LIFE CYCLE

Poverty and deprivation are experienced differently by different social groups across the life
cycle – as are options for building resilience (Holmes and Jones 2013). This section briefly
reviews the evidence on gender-specific risks and vulnerabilities during adolescence – a time
when gender norms become increasingly salient – as well as during adulthood and older
age. It is important to highlight that gender risks and vulnerabilities may also intersect with
other forms of discrimination (e.g. based on disability, ethnicity or refugee status), and these
337
Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

338

Handbook on social protection systems

multiple and overlapping sources of disadvantage should be taken into account in programme
design and implementation (see Jones and Presler-Marshall 2019; Jawad et al. 2019).
18.2.1

Adolescence

Given the immense changes and vulnerability experienced during the second decade of life,
adolescence has increasingly been recognized as a window of opportunity in terms of offsetting childhood disadvantage and altering life trajectories (GAGE Consortium 2019). There is
also growing recognition that gendered social norms become increasingly salient during adolescence, as girls and boys are propelled along feminine and masculine pathways to adulthood
(Harper et al. 2018).
A wide body of evidence highlights how gender norms shape adolescents’ experiences of
schooling, with boys generally prioritized over girls in terms of educational spending and time
for study, and girls at risk of dropping out due to marriage (Marcus and Page 2016; UNESCO
2013). Although highly age- and context-dependent, gender norms generally put adolescent
boys at risk of child labour, while girls either risk exclusion from education, skills-building
opportunities and paid employment (due to their domestic and care work burdens) or become
vulnerable to exploitative forms of employment (such as domestic work or engagement in the
commercial sex industry). In terms of health, adolescent girls are at high risk of poor sexual
and reproductive health outcomes, while boys are at high risk of accidental injuries. Gender
norms also increasingly shape girls’ and boys’ psychosocial well-being during adolescence,
with masculine ideals pushing boys to be stoic and independent, while many girls face strong
restrictions on their mobility and become isolated socially. This in turn is closely linked to
threats that young people face to their bodily integrity, with girls at greater risk of sexual violence and child marriage, and boys at greater risk of physical violence (especially from peers).
18.2.2

Adulthood

In adulthood, differential gender risks and vulnerabilities (social and economic) continue.
In terms of economic vulnerabilities, women face multiple barriers to income generation.
They are less likely to participate in the wage-based labour market than men (49 versus 75
per cent as of 2018) (ILO 2018a) and less likely to have access to formal employment. They
are also often excluded from the most lucrative positions and paid less than men for the same
work (OECD 2019). Women disproportionately shoulder domestic and care responsibilities,
which leaves less time for paid employment and restricts how far they can travel for work
(ILO 2018b). Furthermore, women are more likely to have limited human capital, financial
resources and social ties that would facilitate waged employment, and therefore ‘tend to
engage more in informal activities operated from home, require low capital investments, and
build on skills they already have’ (Eriksen and Silva 2009, cited in Cunguara et al. 2011, 704).
As primary caregivers, women also face disproportionate healthcare costs. Sen and Östlin
(2007, 3) observe that ‘up to 80 percent of healthcare and 90 percent of HIV/AIDS related
illness care is provided in the home’ – almost exclusively by girls and women – at significant
cost either through direct medical expenses or foregone income-generating opportunities.
In terms of social vulnerabilities, women’s care burdens and time poverty play a key role.
Samman et al. (2016) report that across 66 countries covering two-thirds of the world’s population, women take on an extra 10 or more weeks per year of unpaid care work compared to

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Gender and social protection 339
men. Social norms that see women taking on an average of 75 per cent of childcare responsibilities across 37 countries are compounded by limited state recognition and support for the
time poverty women typically face as a result of unpaid care work. Globally, only 41.1 per cent
of mothers with newborns receive maternity benefits, while 83 million new mothers receive
no state support (ILO 2017).
Gender-based violence is also a critical source of (gendered) vulnerability. Women face
high rates of sexual and intimate partner violence (WHO 2017b), whereas men are at much
greater risk of homicide (accounting for 81 per cent of all homicide victims globally) (United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2019) and suicide (13.7 versus 7.5 per 100,000) (WHO
2017a). It is estimated that at least one in three women worldwide experience physical or
sexual abuse at some point in their life (UN News 2019). Economic disadvantage, vulnerability to violence and conservative gender norms all contribute to unequal intra-household
decision making (Mader and Schneebaum 2013). Women’s limited access to and control over
productive assets (such as land, credit and livestock) is one of the main reasons for their lack
of decision-making power (World Bank 2017; Laddey et al. 2011).
18.2.3

Third Age

There is increasing recognition of gender-differentiated experiences in older age (Jones and
Stavropoulou 2015), with older women in low-income countries likely to have slightly higher
healthy life expectancy than older men (GBD 2017 DALYs and HALE Collaborators 2018).
Women not only live longer than men but are also less likely to enjoy income security and
economic independence in older age. Because of accumulated economic disadvantage over
the life course, older women typically have lower incomes and less access to land, housing
and other assets, and thus an inadequate standard of living. Older women are also more likely
than their male peers to be involved in providing unpaid care, to grandchildren and sick family
members, and in domestic work (Rost 2018). These disadvantages are often compounded by
pension systems that do not provide equal outcomes for women. In most countries, women
are less likely than men to receive a pension; the largest gaps were in Egypt and Jordan, with
men seven–eight times more likely to receive a pension than women (UN Women 2015).
Elsewhere, women receive lower benefits largely because non-contributory pensions are less
generous and often insufficient to support older persons in escaping poverty (ILO 2017).
Gendered labour markets and interrupted employment trajectories due to care responsibilities
underpin women’s disadvantage in old age, but these impacts are also shaped by pension
system design. UN Women (2015) argues that strong links between labour market contributions and pension entitlements mean that women fare poorly due to lower average contributions (exacerbated by earlier mandatory retirement ages for women in some contexts). Women
are also disproportionately affected by the depreciation of pension benefits over time as they
have higher average life expectancy than men.
18.2.4

Gendered Patterns of Resilience and Coping Strategies

Resilience to vulnerability and risk is gendered, with men and women, boys and girls having
differential access to coping strategies and resources (e.g. Antonopolous and Floro 2005;
Meinzen-Dick et al. 2011; GAGE Consortium 2019). Holmes and Jones (2013) discuss how
women and men use positive coping strategies (such as reliance on social capital, traditional

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

340

Handbook on social protection systems

reciprocity mechanisms, faith and remittances) in different ways to mitigate risk and vulnerability. For example, very poor women may not have the time or resources to build and maintain
the relationships and associations required for social capital to function as part of a coping
repertoire in times of stress (Bebbington 2007), and may also face discrimination from the
community, especially when other forms of disadvantage such as ethnic minority or refugee
status intersect with gender (Woolcock and Narayan 2000).
Adverse coping strategies such as distress migration and sale of assets, declining consumption patterns, reliance on low-risk but poorly remunerated work and risky behaviours such
as transactional sex also have distinct gendered patterning, with women often shouldering
these negative outcomes disproportionately (Holmes and Jones 2013). Similarly, the GAGE
Consortium (2019) notes that adolescent girls and boys often adopt gender-specific coping
strategies, with girls more likely to opt into child marriage, for example, and boys more likely
to do risky or degrading work to address economic deprivations and/or escape dysfunctional
family dynamics.

18.3

INTEGRATING A GENDER LENS INTO SOCIAL
PROTECTION PROGRAMME DESIGN

Given the gender-specific risks and approaches to resilience discussed above, a key question
is how far this evidence is factored into the design of vulnerability assessments and social protection programming. As programmes have become more gender responsive, some key features have been developed to support gender equality and women’s and girls’ empowerment,
ranging from increased cash transfer amounts to incentivizing adolescent girls’ education to
social protection programme linkages to gender-based violence prevention initiatives.
18.3.1

Targeting Women and Girls to Promote Education and Reproductive Health

A key approach by many programme designers has been to explicitly target females. Many
programmes (especially cash transfers and subsidies) have targeted women and girls to
enhance their access to education and healthcare, based on evidence of the barriers they face
in accessing school and reproductive health services. For example, Bangladesh’s Female
Secondary Stipend Programme, introduced in 1994 to improve girls’ access to education,
included direct payment of secondary fees for enrolled girls contingent on attendance and
exam scores, as well as biannual deposits into savings accounts for girls (Sayed 2016; Hahn
et al. 2018). India’s national conditional cash transfer programme, Janani Suraksha Yojana,
used cash to incentivize women to give birth in public health facilities as a means of reducing
maternal and neonatal mortality (Samuels and Jones 2011). Such programmes have had some
positive impacts in improving access to these services and, in some cases, human capital
outcomes. The Female Secondary Stipend Programme in Bangladesh has not only delayed
girls marrying, but also reduced the age disparity between girls and their husbands (Hahn et al.
2018). In the case of Janani Suraksha Yojana, evidence suggests that impacts are more mixed:
while cash incentives were associated with increased uptake of maternity services, there was
no strong evidence that the programme was associated with a reduction in neonatal mortality
(Powell-Jackson et al. 2015).

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Gender and social protection 341
In some contexts, targeting of women and girls has been linked to programme conditionalities. Mexico’s Oportunidades or Peru’s Juntos conditional cash transfers have provided
vulnerable households with regular cash transfers on the condition that the cash is paid in the
woman’s name. However, while these programmes have gained popularity because of gains
in access to basic education, health and nutrition services for the most vulnerable people, they
have focused on women in their role as caregivers of children rather than in seeking to transform unequal gendered labour markets or the intra-household balance of power (Molyneux
2007; Jones et al. 2008).
18.3.2

Tackling Structural Gender Inequality

To a lesser extent, programme design has, in some cases, been informed by an appreciation of
(and a desire to tackle) the existing discriminatory socio-cultural environment, which hinders
poverty reduction and prevents poor households exiting poverty. These programmes have
coupled economic activities with opportunities to enhance women’s and girls’ bargaining
power and position in the household, as well as the wider community. For example, recognizing that in working to address gender-based violence, cash transfers alone cannot overcome
gender-based norms (Cross et al. 2018, 22), the International Rescue Committee in Jordan is
taking a cash-plus approach. It is combining an unconditional cash transfer with a variety of
women- and girl-centred services – including psychosocial support and life skills sessions,
economic development activities, awareness raising, parenting classes and health services
– to mitigate the risk of gender-based violence and holistically meet the needs of survivors
(Yoshikawa 2015). The author notes that cash is in high demand and has helped attract more
people to access the psychosocial services that directly address the root causes of gender-based
violence. This cash-plus design also attracts men to parenting classes and gender discussion
groups – both of which aim to shift gender norms.
Similarly, some programmes are using cash as a platform to advance more progressive masculinities. In Brazil, the Bolsa Família Companion Programme, run by the non-governmental
organization Promundo, was among the first to use a conditional cash transfer to directly tackle
masculinities, by twinning awareness-raising classes with support groups to change men’s
beliefs about their responsibilities for childcare, cooking and domestic chores (Promundo
2016).
18.3.3

Embedding Support for Women’s and Girls’ Care Burden within Programme
Design

Other initiatives have recognized the importance of supporting women’s and girls’ care work so
as to allow them to participate on more equitable terms in the labour force. Gender-responsive
public works initiatives, including Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Programme (PSNP) and
India’s Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), have
explicitly sought to involve both men and women. They have attempted to break the historic
bias of such initiatives towards men (due to the hard physical nature of the work) and to challenge perceptions about what is appropriate work for women, while providing free childcare
on site to enable women with young children to attend. In Ethiopia, the PSNP also allows
more flexible attendance hours for women in recognition of their care responsibilities and they
receive direct cash support (rather than cash for work) for up to 10 months during pregnancy

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

342

Handbook on social protection systems

and breastfeeding. In India, to address unequal power relations within the household, the
MGNREGS has also supported women to set up bank accounts in their own name, so that they
can become more financially independent and access the money they earn through participating in the programme (Jones et al. 2017).
In terms of design, these public works programmes also go beyond the micro-household
level to encourage investments in community-level assets. Such programmes provide individuals and/or families with cash and/or food for work that typically involves developing
necessary but underfunded community infrastructure (e.g. water harvesting, roads and terracing, school buildings and health clinics) (Antonopoulos 2007). The choice of assets is not
typically made through a gender lens (Holmes and Jones 2013); however, in Ethiopia, donor
pressure to mainstream gender in the PSNP and promote women’s empowerment led (at least
in the design documents) to provisioning for water points and wood fuel sources (to reduce
women’s and girls’ time poverty). The programme also allows for public works labour to
support female-headed households with ploughing (a proscribed task for women). Moreover,
there have also been more recent efforts within the programme to define community assets not
just as tangible assets but also investments in community knowledge and behavioural change.
Examples include the provision of community education on nutritional practices and dietary
diversity, coupled with training in basic gardening and animal husbandry, awareness raising
around HIV and protective measures, as well as around maternal and child health (Irenso and
Atomsa 2018; Welteji et al. 2017).
Finally, some initiatives, although still relatively rare, explicitly recognize women’s care
burden and redefine this as public work in order for women to be eligible for state support.
South Africa’s Zibambele Poverty Alleviation Programme, which recognizes women’s care
burden especially around HIV and care responsibilities for older persons as part of women’s
rights under the constitution, provides a direct grant to women-headed households previously
excluded from the labour market as payment for their time spent on caring. It also supports
skills training, with the longer-term aim of supporting women’s economic empowerment. The
recently discontinued Estancias programme in Mexico provided subsidized childcare allowances to poor urban women to attend crèches run by local female entrepreneurs. This initiative
not only supported women to seek paid employment by ensuring affordable and locally available childcare, but also provided employment opportunities for local women to set up their
own businesses and to provide a much needed public service (Pereznieto and Campos 2010).
To overcome the gender gap in pensions (which as discussed above are linked to women’s
greater lifetime care responsibilities), there have been considerable efforts to promote universal pension coverage through non-contributory or ‘social’ pensions, typically paid to people
aged 65 and above. While non-contributory pensions usually offer smaller benefits, they
ensure basic income security in old age for women and men who have either worked in the
informal economy or done unpaid work, rendering them ineligible for formal sector benefits
(Holmes et al. 2019). In South Africa, the Older Person’s Grant, for example, which has
a relatively high transfer value, has helped reduce poverty and improve the status of women in
rural households. It has also benefited granddaughters through improved health and nutrition
(Duflo 2003; Arza 2015).

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Gender and social protection 343

18.4

PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION EFFECTS ON GIRLS’
AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT AND GENDER
EQUALITY

Despite evidence and advocacy around the developmental importance of gender equality,
girls’ and women’s rights and women’s empowerment over the past few decades, social protection programming has had limited effects on girls’ and women’s empowerment and gender
equality. Why?
18.4.1

Programme Design Considerations

The answer is complex and shaped by multiple factors, including underinvestment in the
institutions and structures that promote gender mainstreaming, and an institutional disconnect
between these and social protection institutions. These factors are compounded by differential
stakeholder interests and influence in promoting social protection, and diverse ideologies that
underpin not just our understanding of poverty and its causes, but also the purpose of social
protection and the role of the state in shaping gender relations. For example, in Ghana the
Livelihoods Empowerment Against Poverty cash transfer programme has been framed in
terms of supporting all citizens to ultimately contribute to national economic development
goals but not in terms of directly promoting broader equality and well-being, and thus linkages
to complementary services have been largely limited to free access to social health insurance
for cash beneficiaries. Support for a more comprehensive approach to tackling gender-specific
vulnerabilities is still too often dismissed by policy actors nationally and internationally
as ‘beyond the mandate’ of social protection (Holmes et al. 2019). There are some partial
exceptions, however. One example is Pakistan’s Benazir Income Support Programme, which
is more explicitly focused on eradicating poverty and elevating the status of the most marginalized segments of society, especially women. The programme not only targets women, but
has also established complementary links to a small-scale enterprise loan scheme, a vocational
training programme for women, investments in increasing primary school enrolment with
a focus on girls’ enrolment and the establishment of local beneficiary committees aimed at
discussing nutrition, family planning, literacy and women’s empowerment (Bilal 2018).
Although inclusion of women and girls is an important first step, there is a growing consensus that social protection programmes need to go beyond a targeting approach to address
deeply entrenched unequal power relations within and outside the household – not just to
reduce poverty but to increase women’s and girls’ voice, social status and agency. Poverty and
vulnerability assessments are increasingly being undertaken to inform national development
plans and social protection strategies, but too often the gender dimensions of vulnerability
are reflected only weakly in programme design (at best), despite strong evidence of both the
distinct ways in which poor women, men, girls and boys experience poverty and their differential capacities to deal with risks and vulnerability. For example, Hamad et al. (2019) found
that while the vulnerability assessment underpinning the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and UNICEF cash transfer programme in Jordan for Syrian refugees explores
multidimensional vulnerabilities and includes provision for different types of households (for
example, inclusion of female or child-led households), in practice the programme has not been
implemented in a tailored way to account for differential needs and vulnerabilities. Married

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

344

Handbook on social protection systems

adolescents are often excluded once they set up a new household or invisible in multigeneration households and not counted in the per capita allocation of the transfer (Hamad et al. 2019).
18.4.2

Programme Implementation Considerations

To maximize programme impacts, effective implementation and delivery are vital. Where
capacity is weak, it is necessary to invest in building and strengthening institutional capacity
in terms of coordination, monitoring and evaluation across sectors and allocating financial
resources to gender-sensitive programme features. The forging of strong and well-coordinated
institutional linkages with complementary programmes and services is critical given the
multidimensional nature of poverty and vulnerability. The evidence base indicates that integrated services within programme design or strategic linkages to complementary services and
programmes can be valuable and reinforce programme gains. Roelen et al. (2017), in their
discussion of cash-plus programming, reinforce this point by calling for interventions that
combine cash with complimentary access to services, including psychosocial support, asset
transfers and information sensitization. In this regard, Ghana’s labelled child protection cash
transfer, the Livelihoods Empowerment Against Poverty programme, is a good example in so
far as it provided beneficiaries with not only cash but access to free health insurance, including
maternity care cover, and awareness raising about the risks of child labour and child trafficking as they affect girls and boys.
Although affordability and financing debates have important implications for the design and
implementation of gender-sensitive social protection programmes, there has so far been little
gender analysis of these. Gender budgeting tools that track and monitor the level of resources
allocated to the implementation of gender-related programme provisions have been applied
to sectors such as health and education, but this knowledge has not as yet been transferred
to the social protection sector. Attention to accountability mechanisms and ensuring that
programme participants know their rights – and can claim them – are also critical (Samuels
and Jones 2013). Jones et al. (2016) argue that in the case of Palestine’s national cash transfer
programme, the establishment of local social protection beneficiary fora with quotas for men
and women facilitated the airing of grievances and helped to strengthen programme targeting
towards the most vulnerable and socially excluded.
18.4.3

Political Considerations

At a more macro-political level, Holmes et al. (2019), drawing on a ‘three Is’ conceptual
framing, shows that institutional arenas and networks (formal and informal), the interests of
various actors and the ideas framing social protection strategies and programmes all represent
sites for contestation regarding legal change, and policy and resource allocation decisions
shape how social protection addresses (or fails to address) gender. The authors emphasize that
applying a political economy analysis to understand how these policy decisions are shaped
is essential, as technocratic design programming features (while important) are nevertheless
inadequate to address the broader political processes that hinder a more gender-responsive
approach. They underscore that institutional spaces tend to mirror the nature of the underlying
political context in terms of how inclusive they are, and whether they offer opportunities
for activists to drive more gender-responsive social protection agendas. The evidence base
suggests that sub-national institutions may provide more conducive entry points for cham-

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Gender and social protection 345
pions of gender-responsive social protection programming to bring about change and hold
leaders accountable for commitments, as has been seen in parts of India, for example, with the
Self-Employed Women’s Association which provides social insurance protection for informal
workers.
The authors further argue that the extent to which gender-responsive social protection is
promoted also depends on the interests and strategies of a wide range of actors across diverse
institutions. Even where interests are aligned, gender equality activists may not be able to
influence social protection policy if they lack resources and have limited influencing power.
There are few political incentives to promote a more transformative agenda and to address
social protection within wider debates about social justice, inclusion and the redistribution of
resources. This is largely because gender-responsive social protection has not provided a solution to urgent threats to political legitimacy, nor has the social protection agenda proved to be
a policy tool that political elites can mobilize around at critical junctures to promote gender
equality.
Prevailing ideas about poverty, vulnerability and the role of social protection in promoting
a more gender-transformative agenda further shape programme design and implementation.
Indeed, although internationally the notion of a ‘social protection floor’ has gained considerable traction, rights-based approaches have faltered and, in many contexts, there has been
a backlash against long-held entitlements (see ILO 2011; Miller and Redhead 2019).

18.5

CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

Social protection programmes are increasingly integrating gender-responsive features and
there is emerging evidence on improved outcomes as a result. However, such features are still
not routinely integrated into policy and programme design. Few programmes aim to transform
gender relations within the household and community or have equality or empowerment as
their core objectives (Holmes et al. 2019). Most interventions continue to overlook the gender
dynamics that underpin how men and women and boys and girls experience and respond to
poverty and vulnerability, and the discrimination and disadvantage that women and girls face
throughout the life course. This means that social protection largely continues to neglect the
important effects of intra-household power relations, resource allocation, gendered social
norms and girls’ and women’s unequal access to resources.
To harness potential opportunities to promote a more transformative social protection agenda
across the life course, it is essential to develop more politically savvy efforts to improve the
design and impact of gender-responsive social protection programming. Vulnerability assessments which underpin social protection programme design need to consider not only gendered
vulnerabilities at the household, community and service access levels, but also women’s and
gender equality champions’ access to and opportunities for engagement in key institutional
spaces so as to adequately mitigate against micro-, meso- and macro-level disadvantages in
design considerations. Second, given a substantial body of evidence around the disconnect
between gender-responsive design features and practice, there is an urgent need to invest in
capacity building with programme implementers to promote buy-in around the rationale for
and potential dividends of rolling out gender-responsive programme components. Third, the
influencing potential of gender-focused civil society organizations has yet to be realized in
social protection dialogue fora and thus it is essential to support gender-focused civil society

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

346

Handbook on social protection systems

organizations to engage in national and local social protection dialogues – and amplify their
voices. Finally, donors and commissioners of evaluations of social protection programmes
need to routinely adopt a gender and life-cycle lens to identify gaps and gains, measuring not
just transformative impacts but also transformative intent.

REFERENCES
Antonopoulos, R. (2007). The right to a job, the right types of projects: Employment guarantee policies from a gender perspective. Working Paper 516. Annandale-on-Hudson, NY: Levy Economics
Institute of Bard College.
Antonopoulos, R. and M.S. Floro (2005). Asset ownership along gender lines: Evidence from Thailand.
Working Paper 418. Annandale-on-Hudson, NY: Levy Economics Institute of Bard College.
Arza, C. (2015). The gender dimensions of pension systems: Policies and constraints for the protection of
older women. Discussion Paper produced for the UN Women flagship report Progress of the World’s
Women 2015–2016. New York: UN Women.
Barrientos, S., G. Gereffi and A. Rossi (2010). Economic and social upgrading in global production
networks: Developing a framework for analysis. Working Paper. Manchester: Capturing the Gains.
Bebbington, A. (2007). Social movements and the politicization of chronic poverty. Development and
Change 38 (5), 793–818.
Bilal, A. (2018). Empowering women in Pakistan through the Benazir Income Support Programme.
Blog, socialprotection.org, 10 August. https://​socialprotection​.org/​discover/​blog/​empowering​-women​
-pakistan​-through​-benazir​-income​-support​-programme
Cookson, T. (2018). Unjust Conditions: Women’s Work and the Hidden Cost of Cash Transfer Programs.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Cross, A., T. Manell and M. Megevand (2018). Humanitarian cash transfer programming and
gender-based violence outcomes: Evidence and further research priorities. Collected Papers on
Gender and Cash Transfer Programmes in Humanitarian Contexts. New York: IRC.
Cunguara, B., A. Langyintuo and I. Darnhofer (2011). The role of nonfarm income in coping with the
effects of drought in southern Mozambique. Agricultural Economics 42 (6), 701–13.
Duflo, E. (2003). Grandmothers and granddaughters: Old age pension and intra-household allocations in
South Africa. World Bank Economic Review 17 (1), 1–25.
GAGE Consortium (2019). Gender and Adolescence: Why Understanding Adolescent Capabilities,
Change Strategies and Contexts Matters, 2nd edition. London: Gender and Adolescence: Global
Evidence.
GBD 2017 DALYs and HALE Collaborators (2018). Global, regional, and national disability-adjusted
life-years (DALYs) for 359 diseases and injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE) for 195 countries and territories, 1990–2017: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017.
Lancet, 1859–1922. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​S0140​-6736(18)32335​-3
Hahn, Y., A. Islam, K. Nuzhat, R. Smyth and H.-S. Yang (2018). Education, marriage, and fertility:
Long-term evidence from a Female Stipend Program in Bangladesh. Economic Development and
Cultural Change 66 (2), 383–415.
Hamad, B., N. Jones, E. Presler-Marshall, F. Samuels and I. Gercama (2019). Interrogating the potential
of a ‘cash plus’ approach to tackle multidimensional vulnerability in humanitarian contexts: The
case of Syrian refugees in Jordan. In R. Jawad, N. Jones and M. Mahmoud (eds), Social Policy in
the Middle East and North Africa: The New Social Protection Paradigm and Universal Coverage.
Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing, 134‑56.
Harper, C., N. Jones, G. Banteyba, A. Ghimirie and R. Marcus (2018). Empowering Adolescent Girls in
Developing Countries: Gender Justice and Norm Change. London: Routledge.
Holmes, R. and N. Jones (2013). Gender and Social Protection in the Developing World: Beyond
Mothers and Safety Nets. London: Zed Books.
Holmes, R., N. Jones and P. Domingo (2019). The Politics of Gender-Responsive Social Protection.
London: Overseas Development Institute.

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Gender and social protection 347
ILO (International Labour Office) (2011). Social protection floor for a fair and inclusive globalisation.
Report. Geneva: ILO.
ILO (International Labour Office) (2017). World social protection report 2017–19: Universal social
protection to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. Report. Geneva: ILO.
ILO (International Labour Office) (2018a). The gender gap in employment: What’s holding women
back? www​.ilo​.org/​infostories/​en​-GB/​Stories/​Employment/​barriers​-women​#intro
ILO (International Labour Office) (2018b). Care work and care jobs for the future of decent work.
Report. Geneva: ILO.
Irenso, A. and G. Atomsa (2018). Implications of Ethiopia Productive Safety Net Program on household dietary diversity and women’s body mass index: A cross-sectional study. Food and Nutrition
Research 62, 1–11.
Jawad, R., N. Jones and M. Mahmoud (2019). Social Policy in the Middle East and North Africa: The
New Social Protection Paradigm and Universal Coverage. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA,
USA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Jones, N. and E. Presler-Marshall (2019). Social protection and adolescent capabilities: What does
a gender norms lens add to the debate? Briefing Paper. London: ALIGN and GAGE.
Jones, N. and M. Stavropoulou, with E. Presler-Marshall (2015). Resilience for all? Towards
gender-responsive social protection in South-East Asia. Report. Bangkok: UN Women.
Jones, N., R. Vargas and E. Villar (2008). Cash transfers to tackle childhood poverty and vulnerability:
An analysis of Peru’s Juntos programme. Environment and Urbanization 20 (1), 255–73.
Jones, N., B. Abu-Hamad, P. Pereznieto and K. Sylvester (2016). Transforming cash transfers: Citizens’
perspectives on the politics of programme implementation. Journal of Development Studies 52 (8),
1207–24.
Jones, N., R. Holmes, E. Presler-Marshall and M. Stavropoulou (2017). Transforming gender constraints
in the agricultural sector: The potential of social protection programmes. Global Food Security 12,
89–95.
Laddey, R., M. Kumamoto and P. Treichel (2011). Gender and climate change: Enhancing development
through an integrated gender perspective. Discussion Paper. New York: UNDP.
Mader, K. and A. Schneebaum (2013). The gendered nature of intra-household decision making in and
across Europe. Department of Economics Working Papers. Vienna: Vienna University of Economics
and Business.
Marcus, R. and E. Page (2016). Girls’ Learning and Empowerment: The Role of School Environments.
London: Overseas Development Institute.
Meinzen-Dick, R., N. Johnson, A. Quisumbing, J. Njuki, J. Behrman, D. Rubin, A. Peterman and E.
Waithanji (2011). Gender, assets, and agricultural development programs: A conceptual framework.
CAPRi Working Paper No. 99. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
Miller, H. and R. Redhead (2019). Beyond ‘rights-based approaches’? Employing a process and outcomes framework. International Journal of Human Rights 23 (5), 699–718.
Molyneux, M. (2007). Change and continuity in social protection in Latin America: Mothers at the
service of the state? Gender and Development Programme Paper No. 1. Geneva: UN Research
Institute for Social Development.
Molyneux, M., N. Jones and F. Samuels (2016). Can cash transfer programmes have ‘transformative’
effects? Journal of Development Studies 52 (8), 1087–98.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) (2019). OECD employment outlook
2019: The future of work. Paris: OECD Publishing. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1787/​9ee00155​-en
Pereznieto, P. and M. Campos (2010). Gendered risks, poverty and vulnerability in Mexico: Contributions
of the Estancias Infantiles para Apoyar a Madres Trabajadoras programme. Report. London: Overseas
Development Institute.
Powell-Jackson, T., S. Mazumdar and A. Mills (2015). Financial incentives in health: New evidence
from India’s Janani Suraksha Yojana. Journal of Health Economics 43, 154–69.
Promundo (2016). Promundo pilots gender transformative toolkit for Brazilian professionals working
on conditional cash transfer programs. 18 April. https://​promundoglobal​.org/​promundo​-pilots​-gender​
-transformative​-toolkit​-brazilian​-professionals​-working​-conditional​-cash​-transfer​-programs/​

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

348

Handbook on social protection systems

Roelen, K., S. Devereux, A. Abdulai, B. Martorano, T. Palermo and L.P. Ragno (2017). How to make
‘cash plus’ work: Linking cash transfers to services and sectors. Office of Research and Innocenti
Working Paper. Florence: UNICEF Office of Research and Innocenti.
Rost, L., with A. Hunt, E. Samman and F. Samuels (2018). Older women’s economic empowerment:
A review of the literature. Working Paper 540. London: Overseas Development Institute.
Samman, E., E. Presler-Marshall, N. Jones, with T. Bhatkal, C. Melamed, M. Stavropoulou and J.
Wallace (2016). Women’s work: Mothers, children and the global childcare crisis. Report. London:
Overseas Development Institute.
Samuels, F. and N. Jones (2011). Cash transfers for maternal health: Design opportunities and challenges
in low-resource settings. Project briefing No. 68. London: Overseas Development Institute.
Samuels, F. and N. Jones (2013). Cash transfers: Good governance and accountability in short supply.
The Guardian, 8 August. www​.theguardian​.com/​global​-development​-professionals​-network/​2013/​
aug/​08/​cash​-transfer​-citizen​-engagement
Sayed, Y. (2016). Effect of girls’ secondary school stipend on completed schooling, age of marriage,
and age of first birth: Evidence from Bangladesh. WIDER Working Paper 110/2016. Helsinki:
UNU-WIDER.
Sen, G. and P. Östlin (2007). Unequal, unfair, ineffective and inefficient: Gender in equity and health:
Why it exists and how we can change it. Final report to the WHO Commission on Social Determinants
of Health, Women and Gender Equity Knowledge Network. Geneva: WHO.
UN News (2019). A staggering one-in-three women experience physical, sexual abuse. https://​news​.un​
.org/​en/​story/​2019/​11/​1052041
UN Women (2015). Protecting women’s income security in old age: Toward gender-responsive pension
systems. UN Women Policy Brief Number 3. New York: UN Women.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) (2013). Gender equality in
education: Education sector technical notes. Paris: UNESCO.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2019). 2019 global study on homicide. Vienna: UNODC.
Welteji, D., K. Mohammed and K. Hussein (2017). The contribution of Productive Safety Net Program
for food security of the rural households in the case of Bale Zone, Southeast Ethiopia. Agriculture and
Food Security 6 (53), 2–11.
WHO (World Health Organization) (2017a). Mental health atlas 2017. Report. Geneva: WHO.
WHO (World Health Organization) (2017b). Violence against women: Key facts. www​.who​.int/​news​
-room/​fact​-sheets/​detail/​violence​-against​-women
Woolcock, M. and D. Narayan (2000). Social capital: Implications for development theory, research, and
policy. World Bank Research Observer 15 (2), 225–49.
World Bank (2017). Measuring women’s agency. Policy Research Working Paper 8148. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
Yoshikawa, L. (2015). Integrating cash transfers into gender-based violence programs in Jordan:
Benefits, risks and challenges. Report. New York and Geneva: International Rescue Committee and
UNHCR.

Nicola Jones - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:30:38AM
via William and Mary School of Law

