29. International actors and social protection
Jeremy Seekings

29.1

INTRODUCTION

Social protection policy has long been shaped and sometimes driven by international or transnational actors (see Chapter 10). Imperial states sometimes imposed policies on their colonies,
the International Labour Organization (ILO) actively promoted employment-related models of
social protection (drawing heavily on the German model) and, from the 1960s, the World Food
Programme (WFP) led responses to drought that over time often evolved into ongoing social
protection programmes. In the 1990s, the World Bank promoted the privatization of heavily
subsidized social insurance systems, including especially contributory or employment-linked
old-age pensions. Across much of Latin America and the post-Communist countries of Central
and Eastern Europe and Central Asia, public programmes were dismantled, sometimes without
any significant alternatives (Cook 2007; Orenstein 2008).
In the 2000s, the landscape of social protection reform shifted, from retrenchment to expansion, and involving many more international and transnational actors. These actors – including
inter-governmental agencies (including the World Bank and United Nations (UN) agencies), government aid agencies operating internationally (such as Britain’s Department for
International Development, DfID), and international non-governmental organizations (such as
HelpAge International or the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, linked to the German Social Democratic
Party) – have assumed newly important roles in driving and reshaping the social protection
agenda. They have commissioned research on the design and effects of programmes, collated
data on their reach and cost, supported policy experts, published evidence-based but nonetheless promotional literature and funded seminars, workshops and training courses to promote
not only social protection in general but their favoured models in particular. Moreover, many
international organizations worked to incorporate the idea of a right to social protection into
international agreements, especially the ILO Recommendation on Social Protection Floors (in
2012) and Sustainable Development Goal 1.3 (in 2015). Social protection – like other fields
of social policy – has indeed become ‘global’, generating a growing scholarly literature (and
even a specialist journal, Global Social Policy).
The crescendo of attention from diverse international organizations has encouraged national
governments to expand social protection. When national governments have been reluctant
or unable to do so, international organizations have often stepped in to introduce or operate
programmes. In many African countries, ‘pilot’ programmes were initiated by international
organizations, with external funding and ‘technical’ assistance. In some countries, dedicated
‘government’ or parastatal agencies have been established, run by international organizations
with the approval of national governments. In other countries, international organizations have
operated primarily through local civil society organizations, some of which were established
for the express purpose of implementing foreign-funded programmers. International organizations have generally taken the lead in monitoring and evaluating the programmes they have
491
Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

492

Handbook on social protection systems

funded. Faced with underenthusiastic national governments, international organizations have
sponsored local civil society organizations to mobilize pressure within the affected countries.
International organizations hold many of the strong cards in this game. But they are rarely
strong enough to bend national governments – even in low-income countries – to their will. In
most countries, social protection reforms are ‘negotiated’, not only between domestic political
actors but also between them and international organizations (Hickey et al. 2019a). Sometimes
national governments even introduce reforms that are opposed by international organizations.
In these negotiations, it is rare for either international organizations or the national government to speak with one voice. Rather, diverse international organizations promote varied
approaches and models, whilst government departments and individual politicians differ in
their enthusiasm for reform. The result is a complex political landscape marked by considerable uncertainty as well as variation in the scale and form of reform.
This chapter surveys the roles of international organizations in the expansionary phase of
social protection reform in the 2000s, focusing primarily on Sub-Saharan Africa. The next
section examines the rise in enthusiasm for social protection across a range of international
organizations. The following section examines the models promoted by, discourses used and
ideologies underlying the major influence of international organizations, focusing primarily on
the World Bank and ILO. The final section considers the influence of national organizations
at the national level, pointing to some of the growing number of country case studies of the
politics of policy reform.

29.2

INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS AND THE NEW
SOCIAL PROTECTION AGENDA

Whilst international organizations have been involved in the promotion of (what has much
more recently come to be called) ‘social protection’ reforms for almost a century, the terrain
was uncluttered until the 2000s. From the 1930s until the 1960s the ILO was by far the most
active of the international organizations. The ILO’s pursuit of compromise between employers, workers and states – in order to discourage revolution – expanded from the regulation of
wages to the regulation of forms of social protection linked to wage employment, generally
along German lines. The ILO facilitated the expansion of social insurance programmes
for formally employed workers, including in parts of Central America. Imperial networks
also served as mechanisms for the international diffusion of ideas and models. The French
extended to their colonies employment-linked family allowance programmes (together with
other contributory social insurance programmes). In some parts of the British Empire, colonial
governments introduced tax-financed social assistance programmes (as well as tax-financed
health systems), aimed not at waged workers but at those poor people who were unable to
work because of age or disability. The imperial British state generally discouraged social
assistance reforms, preferring instead contributory programmes (including provident funds)
for formally employed workers and rural development programmes for smallholder farmers.
Indeed, from the 1940s, all of the imperial states and most other international organizations
prioritized (economic) ‘development’ which (they believed) would reduce or remove the need
for any social assistance and would in time lead to the expansion of employment-related social
protection.

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

International actors and social protection 493
The first major shift in the approach of international organizations came in the 1960s with
the establishment of the WFP to coordinate humanitarian relief operations. If development
was the preferred long-term solution to predominantly rural poverty, emergency relief was
required in the short term in response to drought, floods or other disasters that prevented poor
people from providing for themselves. The WFP ensured that large volumes of food were provided through feeding programmes (especially for children) and food-for-work programmes
(for able-bodied adults) either through government or civil society channels.
The next major shift came in the late 1980s and early 1990s. A series of economic crises –
first in Latin America, then following the collapse of the Soviet Empire, led to the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank imposing structural adjustment programmes. In
countries with expensive contributory pension systems – especially post-Soviet Europe and
the more industrialized Latin American countries – the World Bank promoted energetically
the privatization of social insurance (Orenstein 2008). Austerity required the introduction of
user fees which had massive consequences, especially in health services. The World Bank
(and other organizations) established ‘social funds’ to mitigate the effects of austerity on the
poor. In parts of Africa, AIDS added to the urgency of addressing ‘social risks’. In 1993, the
IMF and World Bank formally recognized the importance of ‘social safety nets’ in mitigating
the adverse effects of economic reform (and thus offset political opposition to reforms). The
following year the World Bank published a major report outlining its proposals for comprehensive old-age pensions, including non-contributory pensions for the very poor. In 1996, the
World Bank established a Social Protection and Labour Unit and began to prepare a new social
protection strategy. Despite these initiatives, social protection was not mentioned in the 2000
Millennium Development Goals.
In 2001, the World Bank published its first Social Protection Sector Strategy (2001a) and
applied this to Africa (2001b). It also began to fund experimental conditional cash transfer programmes (promoting versions of the models initiated in Brazil and Mexico). From 2002, the
World Bank organized major conferences to promote conditional cash transfer programmes
(World Bank 2012a, appendix A). At the same time the ILO re-examined its approach to social
protection, in part in order to push back against the World Bank’s trespassing on what the
ILO considered to be its turf. ILO researchers recognized that a focus on employment-related
social insurance left a massive ‘coverage gap’. The ILO’s 2000 World Labor Report examined
Income Security and Social Protection in a Changing World. In 2003, the ILO launched a
‘Global Campaign on Social Security and Coverage for All’ and began to develop the concept
of a ‘Social Protection Floor’ (Cichon and Hagemejer 2007). In 2005, both the ILO and
World Bank published their first studies of the cost of social protection programmes. Both
concluded that a significant expansion of social protection was affordable in low- as well as
middle-income countries (Kakwani and Subbarao 2005; Pal et al. 2005). The World Bank’s
embrace of social protection was part of a broader re-engagement with ‘social’ dimensions of
development (Vetterlein 2017).
Other international organizations became similarly enthused with pro-poor social protection. DfID established within its Policy Division in 2002–2003 a ‘Reaching the Very Poorest’
team, focusing on cash transfers. This later evolved into a Social Protection team (Hickey and
Seekings 2019). The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development established
in 2004, within its Network on Poverty Reduction, a Task Team on Risk, Vulnerability and
Social Protection (later renamed Social Protection and Social Policy), bringing together
experts from government, international and civil society organizations (Voipio 2007). German

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

494

Handbook on social protection systems

agencies first engaged with the idea of cash transfers in 1998–99 and embraced it strongly
from 2004. Nordic agencies developed a particular interest in social protection for the disabled.
Reform accelerated during and after the financial and economic crisis of 2008–2009.
The ILO persuaded the other UN agencies to launch a Social Protection Floor Initiative as
one of nine UN joint initiatives to cope with the effects of the economic crisis. The World
Bank initiated a review of social protection in Africa. In 2010, the ILO published a guide to
Extending Social Security to All (ILO 2010a) as well as its first (and, it turned out, only) World
Social Security Report (ILO 2010b). In 2012, the International Labour Conference adopted
Recommendation 202 on Social Protection Floors (i.e. covering basic income security and
access to health care). The World Bank itself restated its case for social protection in a new
strategy document (World Bank 2012a), published its study of cash transfers in Africa as The
Cash Dividend (Garcia and Moore 2012) and followed this with a dedicated ‘Social Protection
Strategy for Africa’ (World Bank 2012b). As Garcia and Moore enthused, experiences with
cash transfers in Africa suggested that ‘the question is not whether cash transfers can be used
in the region, but how they should be used, and how they can be adapted and developed to meet
social protection and development goals’ (2012, 9).
The embrace of social protection became yet more evident in 2014, when the ILO published
its first World Social Protection Report (ILO 2014) – at least in part as a mechanism to monitor
progress towards the realization of the Social Protection Floors Recommendation – and the
World Bank published its first State of Social Safety Nets Report (World Bank 2014). As the
ILO put it, social protection was now at the ‘forefront of the development agenda’ (ILO 2014,
xix). The ILO published a second World Social Protection Report, 2017–19 (ILO 2017) whilst
the World Bank published further full-length State of Social Safety Nets Reports (World Bank
2015, 2018). Almost all of the major international organizations have published their own
strategy documents staking out their commitment to social protection (FAO 2017; UNDP
2016; UNICEF 2012, 2019). In 2019, the UN Development Programme published a major
report on The State of Social Assistance in Africa. Even the IMF weighed in, working with the
World Bank especially to support increased expenditures on social protection (Zhou 2017).
Some regional organizations have also chimed in. The Asian Development Bank, for example,
followed the World Bank’s lead in adopting a Social Protection Strategy as early as 2001
(ADB 2001). More recently, it adopted an operational plan in 2014 and publishes a Social
Protection Index.1
Whilst many international organizations endorsed and promoted social protection, the
World Bank and ILO took the lead. This was reflected in a flood of further reports on social
protection. In 2018–19 alone, the World Bank published two major reports (Beegle et al.
2018; Packard et al. 2019). The ILO published the first volume of a compendium celebrating
100 Years of Social Protection (Ortiz et al. 2019a), a report on the implementation of social
protection floors (ILO 2019) and an updated handbook on Fiscal Space for Social Protection
(Ortiz et al. 2019b).
Coordination between international organizations at the global level was initially facilitated through the Social Protection Floor Initiative, co-chaired by the ILO and World Health
Organization. From 2012, the coordinating role was taken over by a new Social Protection
Inter-Agency Cooperation Board (SPIAC-B), in which the World Bank played a much more

1

www​.adb​.org/​themes/​social​-development/​social​-protection/​index.

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

International actors and social protection 495
prominent role (Deacon 2013b). At the country level, the UN Development Programme
assumed the lead in establishing ‘One-UN’ social protection country teams. Government
aid agencies also sought to coordinate their expenditures at the country level. International
organizations involved in humanitarian relief sought to coordinate their involvement in social
protection. In 2015–16, aid donors (such as DfID), UN agencies and non-governmental organizations negotiated and signed a ‘Grand Bargain’ that charted a way forward for coordinated
and effective humanitarian expenditure, including a clear commitment to the increased use
of ‘cash-based programming’ in alignment with national social protection systems. In 2016,
the ILO, World Bank and a host of other international organizations launched a ‘Global
Partnership for Universal Social Protection’, all endorsing the view that ‘social protection is
a primary development priority’.2
Those international organizations with financial resources invested heavily in social protection, especially during the 2007–2009 crisis. There is a paucity of good data on expenditure
on social protection by most international organizations. In the years preceding the crisis the
World Bank spent on average only about USD 500 million per annum. Between 2009 and
2013 it spent on average about USD 2 billion per annum (Andrews et al. 2014, 10). DfID’s
expenditure on social protection similarly quadrupled following the crisis, although at a much
lower level than the World Bank’s (Hickey and Seekings 2019, 259). The total value of
international organizations’ expenditure on humanitarian relief – much of which should be
considered as social protection – was estimated at USD 2.8 billion in 2016 (and this amounted
to just 10 per cent of the total value of humanitarian relief, most of which is distributed in
kind) (CaLP 2018). In many countries, especially lower-income countries, international organizations funded most or all expenditure on social protection. The World Bank reports that, in
Africa, ‘development partners finance an average 55 percent of program spending’ on social
safety nets (Beegle et al. 2018, 153–4).
In part because of their expenditures and in part because of their concern to improve
design, international organizations funded many monitoring and evaluation projects. These
also served to demonstrate the benefits of social protection to sceptical national governments
(Davis et al. 2016). Evaluations that demonstrated that social protection reduced poverty and
were developmental served to legitimate the programmes and the organizations promoting
them (Peck and Theodore 2015; Teichman 2017).
International organizations also sponsored training courses, not only to improve the
implementation of social protection programmes but also to encourage national political and
bureaucratic elites to support their adoption. Goldman quotes a World Bank official explaining
the objective of a training seminar:
The purpose of this training seminar is to try to create an epistemic community in Africa so that you
can have more power with your governments when negotiating for institutional reform. You won’t
feel alone. We’ll help you set up networks and share information. You will be able to say to your
bosses: ‘Hey, but that’s how they’re doing it next door, and look how successful they are.’ We are
prepared to offer you support … And when you return home after this workshop, we would like you to
initiate your own training workshops … This way we can change decision-making in your countries.
(Goldman 2005, 21)

2

www​.social​-protection​.org/​gimi/​gess/​RessourcePDF​.action​?id​=​53992.

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

496

Handbook on social protection systems

This particular seminar was not concerned with social protection, but the same could be said
of the many seminars and courses on social protection that have been organized or funded by
the World Bank and many other international organizations.3 The World Bank, for example,
ran a series of ‘South-South Learning Forums’ on social protection.4 In 2017–18, the ILO
initiated the development of the primarily online ‘Transform’ programme for politicians and
officials engaged in building and managing social protection in Africa.5 Ostensibly developed
for the African Union, the objective is described as ‘to help decision makers and practitioners
take ownership in building national social protection systems through continuous learning and
reflective practice’, i.e. training was part of a conscious effort among international organizations to hand over the initiative in policy reform to national governments and local civil society
organizations.
International organizations present themselves as the guardians of ‘technical’ knowledge
and expertise. Rendering questions of policy reform as ‘technical’ serves to legitimate and
empower ‘experts’ – and the organizations that employ or mobilize them – and to depoliticize the choices that must be made about the allocation of scarce resources (Ferguson 1990;
Goldman 2005; Li 2007). The considerable resources of international organizations have been
used to strongly promote the idea that the expansion of social protection is not only technically
appropriate and feasible but also rooted in generally agreed norms and values. Scepticism
about reform is delegitimated.
A wide array of international organizations thus constructed in the 2000s what might be considered a global ‘epistemic community’ (Haas 1992) or ‘policy network’ (Marsh and Rhodes
1992) around social protection. This community or network spanned the international organizations themselves. As importantly, the various organizations attracted or recruited into the
community or network activists in civil society, officials within the state and politicians in or
out of government in countries across the global South. With their Southern allies or recruits,
they sought to establish expansionary social protection as the norm in poverty reduction.

29.3

MODELS, DISCOURSES AND IDEOLOGIES

International organizations may have been united in their intensifying advocacy of social protection and sometimes drew attention to the similarities in their positions (see, e.g. Rawlings
et al. 2013). But they also competed with each other in terms of their preferred models, their
underlying objectives and the discourses employed. von Gliszczynski and Leisering (2016)
identify four predominant models of social cash transfers, each with their own champions. In
their account, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) advocated family allowances,
the World Bank championed conditional cash transfers, ‘general household assistance’
was supported by the ILO and DfID, whilst social pensions were championed by HelpAge
International (among others). Further models – such as workfare and universal basic income

See socialprotection.org.
See, for 2014: www​.worldbank​.org/​en/​events/​2014/​03/​17/​south​-south​-learning​-forum​-2014​
-desig​ning​-and​-delivering​-social​-protection​-and​-labor​-systems.
5
See
https://​thl​.fi/​en/​web/​thlfi​-en/​research​-and​-expertwork/​projects​-and​-programmes/​eu​-social​
-prot​ection​-systems​-programme​-eu​-sps/​capacity​-development/​transform​-african​-social​-protection​
-leadership​-curriculum.
3
4

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

International actors and social protection 497
– failed to attract comparable support. Whilst this precise identification of models is open to
debate, von Gliszczynski and Leisering are clearly correct to point to the differences between
international organizations with regard to their approaches to social protection.
Competition was most evident between the World Bank and ILO. Their respective publications, workshops and sponsored training courses were intended not simply to promote social
protection, but to promote their particular version. When the World Bank ventured onto the
field of social protection in the 1990s, the ILO appeared to see this not only as trespassing
but as an invasion by a hostile force (from across the Atlantic) with quite different values and
objectives. The ILO pushed back against the World Bank’s influence on the reform of welfare
systems in post-Communist Eastern Europe (Deacon et al. 1997; Deacon and Stubbs 2007).
The ILO’s reassessment of its approach to social protection entailed part of what Deacon
(drawing on Gramsci) called a ‘war of position’ (Deacon 2007, 16; see also Deacon 2013a;
Charlton and McKinnon 2002). The 2007–2009 crisis provided conditions in which the ILO
was able to regain a prominent position in the global debate over social protection (Heneghan
and Orenstein 2019).
The differences between the World Bank and ILO were evident even in their definitions of
social protection, and especially on the scope of social transfers (see Chapter 2). The World
Bank focused specifically on social safety nets targeted on the poor, whether the benefits were
paid in cash or in kind. The World Bank thus included feeding schemes as well as workfare
programmes in its definition of social protection. The ILO, in contrast, focused on cash transfer programmes, collating data on some but not all workfare programmes and on few if any
feeding schemes. Estimates of the total number of people benefitting from social protection
across the developing world varied from fewer than 1 billion people (using a definition similar
to the ILO’s) (Hanlon et al. 2010) to closer to 2 billion (according to the World Bank 2015, 1).
Organizations differ also in terms of the data they collect and publish. The World Bank’s
Atlas of Social Protection Indicators of Resilience and Equity database primarily uses
household survey data to document the distribution of benefits from different programmes in
order to identify how effective the programmes are in reducing poverty. Some programmes –
including general consumer subsidies (whether of fuel or basic foods) as well as contributory,
employment-related programmes – generally benefit non-poor households disproportionately
or even exclusively. Means-tested programmes and self-targeted programmes (especially
low-benefit workfare programmes) are much more likely to benefit the poor. The ILO’s objective is social protection for all, not only for the poor. Their database collates data (provided by
national governments) on overall ‘coverage’ without regard for whether the beneficiaries are
poor or non-poor.
The World Bank and ILO differ also in their underlying objectives. The Bank’s approach
to social protection originally focused on ‘social risks’ but came to focus more on need. The
Bank’s goal has been the reduction of poverty, in the long run (through ‘development’) as
well as the short run (through ‘social safety nets’). Its favoured programmes have therefore
been safety nets that are also developmental, i.e. programmes that not only meet immediate
needs but are also investments in future production and the future capabilities of currently
poor people. The 2001 Social Protection Sector Strategy was thus subtitled ‘From safety net
to springboard’ (World Bank 2001a). The Bank’s vice-president for Africa explained:

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

498

Handbook on social protection systems

The strategy is not about relief or welfare hand-outs, but rather investments that prevent irreversible
human development losses by the poor, thereby protecting their future productivity. School-fee
waivers, self-targeted public workfare, community empowerment, and microfinance are likely to be
important activities to reduce risk and vulnerability. For example, public assistance to ensure that
orphans go to school could be an important social protection intervention to lift these children out of
poverty traps and also to prevent a potential erosion of human capital. Such programs can constitute
legitimate investment priority, even for very poor countries in Africa. (World Bank 2001b, iii)

For the World Bank, school feeding schemes and conditional cash transfers (such as Brazil’s
Bolsa Familia) entail investments in human capital, whilst workfare programmes entail an
investment in infrastructure. Social protection for children is a higher priority than social
protection for the elderly. The World Bank became especially concerned with the ‘shocks’ –
including climatic events – that made it difficult for the poor to raise themselves out of poverty.
The ILO, in contrast, focuses on rights. Historically, it was concerned with the rights of
workers in formal wage employment. In the 2000s, it redefined its goal as rights for all people,
in all stages of life. The primary architect of the Social Protection Floor initiative, Michael
Cichon (2013), gushingly described Recommendation 202 as the ‘Magna Carta’ of social
protection (referring to the charter of 1215 in which the then King of England recognized that
at least some of his subjects had civil and political rights). The Recommendation opened with
a preamble that reaffirmed that ‘the right to social security is a human right’. The word ‘right’
appears almost 300 times in the ILO’s 2017–19 World Social Protection Report (ILO 2017). In
contrast, the World Bank rarely refers to rights. In its 2018 State of Social Safety Nets Report,
the word appears only once in the main text (World Bank 2018, 34). Peck and Theodore (2015)
argue that the World Bank’s preference for the Mexican model of a conditional cash transfer
over the Brazilian model reflected the Bank’s wariness of Brazilian rights discourses.
The ILO was not alone in emphasizing rights. A rights-based approach was promoted also
by DfID, some of the other European donor agencies, HelpAge International and some other
non-governmental organizations, as well as UN special rapporteurs (see, especially, Sepúlveda
2014).
Whilst there is a clear contrast in their respective emphases on need (and risk) and rights,
the ILO shares the Bank’s concern with development. The ILO also employs developmental
discourses, although with a somewhat different emphasis to the World Bank:
The lack of access to social protection constitutes a major obstacle to economic and social development. Inadequate or absent social protection coverage is associated with high and persistent levels
of poverty and economic insecurity, growing levels of inequality, insufficient investments in human
capital and human capabilities, and weak aggregate demand in a time of recession and slow growth.
(ILO 2014, xix)

The idea of development may not have been as central to the ILO’s discourse and practices as
to the World Bank’s, but the ILO from the outset believed that a compromise between capital
and labour would require economic growth as well as facilitating a just distribution of the
benefits thereof.
Whereas the differences between inter-governmental (‘multilateral’) agencies were due
to their varied mandates as well as ideological differences, the ‘bilateral’ donor agencies
generally had the same mandates. The differences between their approaches thus reflected ideological or cultural differences, often rooted in the dominant ideologies of welfare in their own
countries. DfID, for example, was rooted in British welfare doctrines. Like the World Bank, it

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

International actors and social protection 499
prioritized poverty reduction. But it was less inclined to see cash transfers as developmental.
It tended to favour targeted but unconditional programmes for the deserving poor and had
some sympathy for the rights-based approach favoured strongly by the ILO and some other
(especially Nordic) donor agencies (Hickey and Seekings 2019).
International organizations thus formed a number of separate (perhaps overlapping) epistemic communities or policy networks within a broader, overarching social-protectionist
community or network. The World Bank attracts most critical attention, but it was just one
of a number of organizations promoting diverse models and ideologies of social protection.
Recognizing that unrestricted competition might be counter-productive to the overall goal
of expanding social protection, international organizations sought to coordinate at the global
level as well as in individual countries across the global South. Unsurprisingly, such interorganizational coordination was not uncomplicated. The shift from the Social Protection Floor
Initiative to the Social Protection Inter-Agency Cooperation Board from 2012 was seen within
the ILO as in part the attempted reassertion of World Bank authority. In this context of competition, the organizations themselves have been sites of struggle. Deacon (2013a) demonstrated
how officials within the ILO competed in the early 2000s to determine the ILO’s new strategy.
Heneghan and Orenstein (2019) show that there were struggles within the World Bank also,
both in its embrace of pension privatization (in the 1990s) and then its retreat from this (in the
2000s). Indeed, the shift in influence from the World Bank to the ILO in the 2010s reflected
the Bank’s internal tensions as well as the changed external context – and probably also contributed to the internal tensions.

29.4

INFLUENCE ON NATIONAL POLICYMAKING

The various international organizations were competing (and cooperating) with the primary
goal of influencing national governments. Despite the relentless tide of publications and activities – and the considerable financial as well as technical resources at the disposal of some of
the organizations – they had much less influence over most national governments than they
wanted. They generally succeeded in placing expansionary reforms of social protection on the
policymaking agenda. They were often able to persuade officials in departments responsible
for prospective social protection or in civil society and very often succeeded in pushing governments to adopt or at least draft documents setting out a national social protection strategy.
But they were less successful in persuading parliamentarians and government ministers.
National governments tended to view international organizations as promoting their own
agenda rather than solving the problems of primary concern to the governments themselves.
The result was that social protection was expanded, but not to the extent recommended by
international organizations and with less buy-in from national governments than the international organizations had hoped.
Brooks (2009) and others have demonstrated similar patterns in the 1990s when the World
Bank enjoyed uneven success in promoting its preferred multi-pillar model of pension reforms.
Some governments in Latin America and post-Soviet Eastern Europe and Western Asia privatized their government-run pension funds, but most implemented reforms in part only.
In the 2000s, some countries across the global South had already pioneered and institutionalized the expansion of social assistance. Old-age pensions and other programmes in South
Africa and Mauritius long preceded the 2000s, whilst old-age pensions in Botswana and

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

500

Handbook on social protection systems

conditional cash transfers in Brazil and Mexico were more recent precedents. Moreover, in the
early 2000s some governments introduced similar reforms without international organizations
playing a major role, or even in the face of opposition from international organizations. In
Lesotho, for example, the government introduced old-age pensions in 2004 against the advice
of international organizations (Granvik Saminathen 2019). Ethiopia’s government similarly
introduced the Productive Safety Net Programme in defiance of international organizations
(Lavers 2019a). In four major Latin American countries – Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico
– Garay (2016, 14) found that international organizations had not played a significant role in
the expansion of social cash transfers prior to 2010 (contrary to the argument by Teichman
(2017) that international organizations did influence the design and implementation of social
cash transfers in both Chile and Mexico). These precedents led Hanlon et al. (2010) to proclaim that the rise of social cash transfers was a ‘quiet revolution’ from the global South.
Despite these precedents, when international organizations swung behind the expansion
of social assistance, there was wide variation in terms of their ‘success’ in persuading other
governments to implement social protection reforms. The governments of many lower- and
middle-income countries proved resistant to the blandishments offered by international
organisations. When national governments did implement reforms, they did so because there
were pressing local political reasons for doing so. International organizations had no power
to impose reforms and their powers of persuasion often proved limited. They have had to
negotiate reforms, as many case studies have demonstrated (see, for example, the case studies
in Hickey et al. 2019b). In Africa, almost no country had been as bold in reform – or spends
anywhere near as much – as either the World Bank or ILO recommend.
The limits to influence as well as occasional success can be illustrated in the case of
Tanzania. The World Bank trumpets Tanzania as one of its success stories, pointing to the
dramatic increase in the number of beneficiaries of as well as expenditure on cash transfers
through the Productive Social Safety Nets programme (see, e.g. World Bank 2018, 28; Beegle
et al. 2018, 6). In reality, however, Tanzania’s government – controlled since independence by
a single party, Chama Cha Mapinduzi – stands out in its disinterest in social assistance. It has
emphasized consistently and strongly self-reliance, responsibility and hard work. It was the
World Bank that pushed for, funded and in practice operated the social protection programmes.
Despite the Bank’s developmental arguments and insistence that the cash transfers were not
‘handouts’, the Tanzanian government declined to take full ownership of the programme,
declining even to contribute its promised share of the funding. HelpAge International, DfID
and the ILO also promoted unsuccessfully the idea of a social pension (Ulriksen 2019; Jacob
and Pedersen 2018). Were the donors to withdraw, the government would probably suspend
the programme – as the government of Zambia did in 2018–19. There was one exception to
this picture of disinterest in Tanzania. In self-governing Zanzibar, as on the mainland, the ILO
failed to persuade the government to introduce social pensions. But HelpAge International
patiently nurtured a pro-reform coalition, culminating in the introduction of pensions in
2015–16 (Seekings 2016).
No single country should be considered typical of Africa. Some governments (such as those
in Ethiopia and Rwanda) have – like Zanzibar’s – embraced at least some kinds of social
protection programme. Tanzania was far from unique, however, in that its governments have
been sceptical about social protection programmes. If social assistance is to be considered,
then workfare is favoured, perhaps with parsimonious social grants for very poor households
with children or elderly members.

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

International actors and social protection 501
Part of the gap between international organizations and national governments reflects
ideological differences. In Zanzibar, HelpAge chose not to emphasize a discourse of rights
– although rights are fundamental to HelpAge’s general approach – but rather framed the
proposed pensions in terms of responsibilities. In Zanzibar, HelpAge and reformist officials
argued, responsibility for the elderly had previously been effected through kin and religious
charity. Reforms to public policy were warranted because the institutions of kinship and
religious charity were no longer able to cope with the challenge of poverty among the elderly.
Political elites across much of Africa are wary of the discourse of individual social and economic rights – rooted in Western liberal and social democratic thought – that predominated in
many international organizations. Citizens are viewed not so much as rights-bearing individuals but as persons embedded in networks of relationships – both within and beyond kinship
networks – in which claims are bound up with obligations. These norms are reflected in the
ways that ‘global’ discourses of social and economic rights have been ‘vernacularized’ in the
charters and protocols adopted by the African Union (or its predecessor, the Organisation of
African Unity). The responsibility of society for poor people is reciprocated by the responsibility of poor people to help themselves and (when they can) others. This normative approach
underpins the horror of ‘dependency’ across much of Africa: dependency entails the denial of
reciprocal responsibility (see Seekings 2019a on Botswana). Across Africa, national governments may appear to endorse international agreements such as the ILO’s Recommendation on
Social Protection Floors, but they rarely feel invested in such agreements, which were usually
drafted without much consideration for conditions and norms in Africa (Seekings 2019b).
Most African national governments have adopted typically ambitious social protection
strategy documents.6 But, as Kaltenborn et al. (2018) argue, there is little or no correlation
between the vision set out in such documents and the reality of programmatic reform. A key
reason for this is that such documents are typically written by expatriate consultants paid (for
this and other work) by one or other international organization.
Pointing to the limits of their influence does not mean that international organizations have
no influence. On the contrary, when programmes are introduced, the fingerprints of international organizations are often (but not always) evident. The national officials charged with
developing proposals typically work closely with one or other international organization, are
taken to workshops and on sponsored study tours and courses and are backed up with extensive ‘technical assistance’ (see, e.g. Foli 2016 on Ghana). Indeed, the design and emphasis of
specific programmes often reveals the fingerprints of whichever individual champion of social
protection played a key role in each reform. As Deacon (2013a, 2014) noted with respect to
policy shifts within the ILO, individuals have mattered in social protection reform. Across
Africa, this has been even more true of both globe-trotting consultants and senior political
leaders.
It is not easy to discern any clear pattern in the relative influence of the various international
organizations in individual countries. An organization’s visibility is more likely to reflect
its public efforts to influence government than its actual influence, especially in private. In
Zambia, for example, the German aid agency Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit
and later DfID prominently backed (and publicized) pilot cash transfer programmes in the
2000s, but there was little indication that they exerted much influence over government
6
The UN Development Programme lists a total of 31 countries: https://​social​-assistance​.africa​.undp​
.org/​resources​?category​=​1.

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

502

Handbook on social protection systems

decision makers beyond being permitted to run very limited pilots (Pruce and Hickey 2019;
Kabandula and Seekings 2016). The World Bank appears to have been the ‘lead’ agency in
several African countries. In Ethiopia, the Bank’s influence appears to have been primarily
over the design (Lavers 2019a). In Tanzania, as we saw above, the Bank persuaded the government to allow the Bank to set up and fund a major programme (influenced by the Ethiopian
model) but has not persuaded the government to take ownership of the programme. In Uganda
and Rwanda, DfID has been the most prominent of the international organizations (Bukenya
and Hickey 2019; Lavers 2019b). UNICEF appears to have been the lead agency in Kenya
(with some success), Malawi and Lesotho (less successfully). HelpAge International was
integral to reform in Zanzibar. If there is any pattern here, it is not obvious.

29.5

CONCLUSION

International organizations have played a central role in reshaping the global social protection
agenda. They have spent heavily on literature, workshops, training, monitoring and evaluation
in order to promote their preferred models of social protection. They have lobbied national
governments directly and indirectly, via local civil society and other organizations. Their role
has gone beyond agenda setting, however. The well-resourced international organizations –
i.e. the World Bank and the aid agencies – have funded not only pilot programmes but also the
much more extensive roll-out of national programmes. Yet there are clear limits to the power
of international organizations: whilst they have pushed and pulled national governments to
roll out programmes and, in some cases at least, to assume some fiscal responsibility for the
modest programmes that have been introduced, neither coverage nor national government
expenditure have expanded on the scale that international organizations desired.
Looking forward, there are pressures for the expansion of social protection through social
assistance programmes within as well as beyond individual countries. It is clear that, across
much of Africa at least, economic growth is not going to reduce poverty as dramatically
as it did in East Asia. Rising landlessness, urbanization and the weakening of kin- and
community-based provision for the poor are all likely to increase the need – and demand
– for public provision. The investments by international organizations in promoting social
protection are likely to expand support for expansion within many countries. Both the international organizations, looking over their shoulders at taxpayers in the global North, and the
governments of countries across the global South are likely to incline more strongly towards
pro-poor social protection programmes as it becomes clear that many countries – especially
across Africa – are going to fall far short of achieving Sustainable Development Goal 1 by the
target date of 2030. International organizations will remain powerful players in the politics of
reform, even if they are neither united nor all-powerful.

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

International actors and social protection 503

REFERENCES
ADB (2001). Social Protection Strategy. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
Andrews, Colin, Adea Kryeziu and Dahye Seo (2014). World Bank support for social safety nets,
2007–2013: A review of financing, knowledge services and results. Social Protection and Labor
Discussion Paper 1422. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Beegle, Kathleen, Aline Coudouel and Emma Monsalve (2018). Realizing the Full Potential of Social
Safety Nets in Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Brooks, Sarah (2009). Social Protection and the Market: The Transformation of Social Security
Institutions in Latin America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bukenya, Badru and Sam Hickey (2019). The politics of promoting social protection in Uganda: A comparative analysis of social cash transfers and social health insurance. In Sam Hickey, Tom Lavers,
Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and Jeremy Seekings (eds), The Politics of Social Protection in Eastern and
Southern Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 202–24.
CaLP (2018). The State of the World’s Cash Report: Cash Transfer Programming in Humanitarian Aid.
Cash Learning Partnership.
Charlton, Roger and Roddy McKinnon (2002). International organizations, pension system reform and
alternative agendas: Bringing older people back in? Journal of International Development 14 (8),
1175–86.
Cichon, Michael (2013). The social protection floors recommendation, 2012 (No. 202): Can a six-page
document change the course of social history? International Social Security Review 66 (3–4), 21–43.
Cichon, Michael and K. Hagemejer (2007). Changing the development policy paradigm: Investing in
a social security floor for all. International Social Security Review 60 (2–3), 169–96.
Cook, Linda (2007). Postcommunist Welfare States: Reform Politics in Russia and Eastern Europe.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Davis, B., S. Handa, N. Hypher, N.W. Rossi, P. Winters and J. Yablonski (eds) (2016). From Evidence
to Action: The Story of Cash Transfers and Impact Evaluation in Sub-Saharan Africa. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, FAO and UNICEF.
Deacon, Bob (2007). Global Social Policy and Governance. London: Sage.
Deacon, Bob (2013a). Global Social Policy in the Making: The Foundations of the Social Protection
Floor. Bristol: Policy Press.
Deacon, Bob (2013b). The social protection floor and global social governance: Towards policy synergy
and cooperation between international organizations. International Social Security Review 66 (3–4),
45–67.
Deacon, Bob (2014). Career, charisma, conviction and the challenges facing the social protection floor.
Global Social Policy 14 (3), 406–16.
Deacon, Bob and Paul Stubbs (eds) (2007). Social Policy and International Interventions in South East
Europe. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Deacon, Bob, with Michelle Hulse and Paul Stubbs (1997). Global Social Policy: International
Organisations and the Future of Welfare. London: Sage.
FAO (2017). FAO Social Protection Framework: Promoting Rural Development for All. Rome: Food
and Agriculture Organization.
Ferguson, James (1990). The Anti-Politics Machine: ‘Development’, Depoliticization, and Bureaucratic
Power in Lesotho. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Foli, Rosina (2016). Transnational actors and policy-making in Ghana: The case of the Livelihood
Empowerment against Poverty (LEAP). Global Social Policy 16 (3), 268–86.
Garay, Candelaria (2016). Social Policy Expansion in Latin America. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Garcia, Marito and Charity Moore (2012). The Cash Dividend: The Rise of Cash Transfer Programs in
Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Goldman, Michael (2005). Imperial Nature: The World Bank and Struggles for Social Justice in the Age
of Globalization. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

504

Handbook on social protection systems

Granvik Saminathen, Maria (2019). Policy diffusion, domestic politics and social assistance in Lesotho,
1998–2012. In Sam Hickey, Tom Lavers, Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and Jeremy Seekings (eds), The
Politics of Social Protection in Eastern and Southern Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
148–75.
Haas, Peter (1992). Introduction: Epistemic communities and international policy coordination.
International Organization 46 (1), 1–35.
Hanlon, Joseph, Armando Barrientos and David Hulme (2010). Just Give Money to the Poor: The
Development Revolution from the Global South. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press.
Heneghan, Martin and Mitchell Orenstein (2019). Organizing for impact: International organizations and
global pension policy. Global Social Policy 19 (1–2), 65–86.
Hickey, Sam and Jeremy Seekings (2019). Who should get what, how and why? DfID and the transnational politics of social cash transfers. In Sam Hickey, Tom Lavers, Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and Jeremy
Seekings (eds), The Politics of Social Protection in Eastern and Southern Africa. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 249–76.
Hickey, Sam, Tom Lavers, Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and Jeremy Seekings (2019a). The negotiated politics
of social protection in Sub-Saharan Africa. In Sam Hickey, Tom Lavers, Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and
Jeremy Seekings (eds), The Politics of Social Protection in Eastern and Southern Africa. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1–41.
Hickey, Sam, Tom Lavers, Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and Jeremy Seekings (eds) (2019b). The Politics of
Social Protection in Eastern and Southern Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ILO (2000). World Labour Report. Geneva: International Labour Office.
ILO (2010a). Extending Social Security to All. Geneva: International Labour Office.
ILO (2010b). World Social Security Report. Geneva: International Labour Office.
ILO (2014). World Social Protection Report 2014/15. Geneva: International Labour Office.
ILO (2017). World Social Protection Report 2017–19. Geneva: International Labour Office.
ILO (2019). Universal social protection for human dignity, social justice and sustainable development.
General survey concerning the Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202). Report
of the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations for the 108th
Session of the International Labour Conference, Geneva.
Jacob, Thabit and Rasmus Pedersen (2018). Social protection in an electorally competitive environment: The politics of Productive Social Safety Nets (PSSN) in Tanzania. ESID Working Paper 109.
Manchester: University of Manchester, Effective States and Inclusive Development Research Centre.
Kabandula, Abigail and Jeremy Seekings (2016). Donor influence, the minister of finance and welfare
policy reform in Zambia, 2003–11. CSSR Working Paper 395. Cape Town: Centre for Social Science
Research, University of Cape Town.
Kakwani, N. and K. Subbarao (2005). Aging and Poverty in Africa and the Role of Social Pensions.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Kaltenborn, Markus, Abdul-Gafaru Abdulai, Keetie Roelen and Sarah Hague (2018). The influence of
policy and legal frameworks on the development of national social protection systems. IDS Working
Paper 2017-501. Brighton: Institute of Development Studies.
Lavers, Tom (2019a). Social protection in an aspiring ‘developmental state’: The political drivers of
Ethiopia’s PSNP. African Affairs 184 (473), 646–71.
Lavers, Tom (2019b). Understanding elite commitment to social protection: Rwanda’s Vision 2030
Umurenge programme. In Sam Hickey, Tom Lavers, Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and Jeremy Seekings
(eds), The Politics of Social Protection in Eastern and Southern Africa. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 95–121.
Li, Tania Murray (2007). The Will to Improve: Governmentality, Development and the Practice of
Politics. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Marsh, David and Roderick Rhodes (1992). Policy Networks in British Government. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Orenstein, Michael (2008). Privatizing Pensions: The Transnational Campaign for Social Security
Reform. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

International actors and social protection 505
Ortiz, Isabel, Valérie Schmitt and Loveleen De (eds) (2019a). 100 Years of Social Protection: The Road
to Universal Social Protection Systems and Floors, Vol. 1: 50 Country Studies. Geneva: International
Labour Office.
Ortiz, Isabel, Anis Chowdhury, Fabio Durán-Valverde, Taneem Muzaffar and Stefan Urban (eds)
(2019b). Fiscal Space for Social Protection: A Handbook for Assessing Financing Options. Geneva:
International Labour Office.
Packard, Truman, Ugo Gentilini, Margaret Grosh, Philip O’Keefe, Robert Palacios, David Robalino and
Indhira Santos (2019). Protecting All: Risk Sharing for a Diverse and Diversifying World of Work.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Pal, K., C. Behrendt, F. Leger, M. Cichon and K. Hagemejer (2005). Can low-income countries afford
basic social security? First results of a modelling exercise. Issues in Social Protection discussion paper
13. Geneva: International Labour Office.
Peck, Jamie and Nic Theodore (2015). Fast Policy: Experimental Statecraft at the Thresholds of
Neoliberalism. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Pruce, Kate and Sam Hickey (2019). The politics of promoting social cash transfers in Zambia. In
Sam Hickey, Tom Lavers, Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and Jeremy Seekings (eds), The Politics of Social
Protection in Eastern and Southern Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 176–201.
Rawlings, Laura, Sheila Murthy and Natalia Winder (2013). Common ground UNICEF and World Bank
approaches to building social protection systems. World Bank Social Protection and Labor Policy
Note 15 (June). Washington, DC: World Bank.
Seekings, Jeremy (2016). The introduction of old age pensions in Zanzibar. CSSR Working Paper 393.
Cape Town: Centre for Social Science Research, University of Cape Town.
Seekings, Jeremy (2019a). Building a conservative welfare state in Botswana. In Sam Hickey, Tom
Lavers, Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and Jeremy Seekings (eds), The Politics of Social Protection in Eastern
and Southern Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 42–67.
Seekings, Jeremy (2019b). The limits to ‘global’ social policy: The ILO, the social protection floor and
the politics of welfare in Southern Africa. Global Social Policy 19 (1–2), 139–58.
Sepúlveda, Magdalena (2014). From undeserving poor to rights-holder: A human rights perspective on
social protection systems. Development Pathways Working Paper. Banbury: Development Pathways.
Teichman, Judith (2017). Multilateral lending institutions and transnational policy networks in Mexico
and Chile. Global Governance 13 (4), 557–73.
Ulriksen, Marianne (2019). The development of social protection policies in Tanzania, 2000–2015. In
Sam Hickey, Tom Lavers, Miguel Niño-Zarazúa and Jeremy Seekings (eds), The Politics of Social
Protection in Eastern and Southern Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 122–47.
UNDP (2016). Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practitioners. New York: United
Nations Development Programme.
UNDP (2019). The State of Social Assistance in Africa. New York: United Nations Development
Programme.
UNICEF (2012). Integrated Social Protection Systems: Enhancing Equity for Children; UNICEF Social
Protection Framework. New York: United Nations Children’s Fund.
UNICEF (2019). UNICEF’s Global Social Protection Framework for Children. New York: United
Nations Children’s Fund.
Vetterlein, Antje (2017). Economic growth, poverty reduction, and the role of social policies: The evolution of the World Bank’s social development approach. Global Governance 13 (4), 513–33.
Voipio, Timo (2007). Social protection for poverty reduction: The OECD/DAC/POVNET view. IDS
Bulletin 38 (3), 45–50.
von Gliszczynski, Moritz and Lutz Leisering (2016). Constructing new global models of social security.
How international organizations defined the field of social cash transfers in the 2000s. Journal of
Social Policy 45 (2), 325–43.
World Bank (2001a). Social Protection Sector Strategy: From Safety Net to Springboard. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
World Bank (2001b). Dynamic Risk Management and the Poor: Developing a Social Protection Strategy
for Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

506

Handbook on social protection systems

World Bank (2012a). Social Protection Strategy, 2012–2022. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank (2012b). Social Protection Strategy for Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank (2014). State of Social Safety Nets 2014. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank (2015). State of Social Safety Nets 2015. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank (2018). State of Social Safety Nets 2018. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Zhou, Jianping (2017). IMF collaboration with partner institutions on social protection. Background
Document BD/17-01/07. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, Independent Evaluation
Office.

Jeremy Seekings - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:35:07AM
via William and Mary School of Law

