19. Disability inclusion and social protection
Alexandre Côte

19.1

INTRODUCTION

Persons with disabilities comprise 15 per cent of the world’s population, and are more likely to
live in poverty, face catastrophic health expenditures, have lower levels of education and economic participation and live in households more exposed to economic insecurity and shocks
than persons without disabilities (Mizunoya and Mitra 2013; Mizunoya et al. 2016; WHO and
World Bank 2011; UN DESA 2018; Mitra 2018; Trani et al. 2015). These inequalities arise
from multiple barriers such as stigma, inaccessible infrastructure, information and services as
well as lack of support (WHO and World Bank 2011; UN DESA 2018). Disability-, gender- or
ethnicity-related barriers often intersect leading to compound discriminations, in particular for
women and girls with disabilities.
Fewer than one in five persons with significant disabilities access disability-related social
protection benefits in low- and middle-income countries (LICs and MICs) (Durán Valverde,
et al. 2019). Moreover, existing social protection policies focus mostly on incapacity to
work and poverty rather than providing adequate support for inclusion, which limits their
effectiveness and perpetuates prejudices (Banks et al. 2018a, 2018b; Kidd et al. 2018, 2019a;
Hanass-Hancock et al. 2017; Kelly 2019).
In the last decade, implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)1 has triggered a wide range of policy changes across
countries. The no one left behind focus of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) has
amplified this momentum and fuelled the consensus about the critical role of social protection
in reducing vulnerability and supporting inclusion of persons with disabilities across the life
cycle (ILO 2017, 2019; UN 2015; UN DESA 2018). Building on the 2019 joint statement on
inclusive social protection (ILO 2019), recent studies and ongoing debates,2 this chapter therefore reviews key elements for developing inclusive and universal social protection systems,
with a focus on LICs and MICs. Section 19.2 presents the status quo and reform needs. Section
19.3 reviews the building blocks of an inclusive social protection system, looking at gaining
better insights in the situation of persons with disabilities, addressing access problems and
shortcomings in current programming.

Adopted in 2006 and ratified by 181 countries as of March 2020 (UN DESA 2020).
This chapter draws from recent reports from Development Pathways and the International
Centre of Disability Evidence, funded either by the United Kingdom’s Department for International
Development or the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, as well as from an ongoing
project implemented by the International Labour Organization and UNICEF. All views expressed and
possible errors remain the sole responsibility of the author.
1
2

354
Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Disability inclusion and social protection 355

19.2

RETHINKING THE RATIONALE OF SOCIAL PROTECTION
FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

19.2.1

Coverage

Through a combination of contributory and tax-financed schemes, most high-income countries provide a quasi-universal social protection coverage to persons with disabilities (OECD
2010; Grammenos 2016). In 2019, 68.0 per cent of the European Union population (aged 16
and over) likely to live with a disability would have been at risk of poverty without social
protection benefits (Eurostat 2020). By contrast, only 18.5 per cent of persons with significant
disabilities in LICs and MICs have access to disability-related social protection benefits,
ranging from 95 per cent coverage in Eastern Europe to 7 per cent or less in southern Asia and
Sub-Saharan Africa (Durán Valverde et al. 2019). LICs and MICs systems tend to combine
contributory (ILO 2017) and poverty-targeted tax-financed schemes leaving the majority of
persons with disabilities who are not in formal employment and not poor enough unsupported
– the ‘missing middle’ (Larasati et al. 2019; UN DESA 2018; Kidd et al. 2019a).
These differences are reflected in the level of disability-related social protection expenditures which represent on average 2.1 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in European
Union countries (Grammenos 2016) while few LICs and MICs with tax-financed disability
benefits invest more than 0.3 per cent of GDP (Kidd et al. 2019a).
Most recent global estimates consider that a basic universal disability benefit for persons
with disabilities3 would require at least 0.6 per cent of GDP on average in LICs and MICs
(Durán Valverde et al. 2020). Next to additional financial resources, inclusive social protection
systems also require a departure from outlived concepts of disability and from limited consideration for disability-related costs (Diwakar and Shepherd 2018).
19.2.2

Beyond Incapacity to Work

Historically, social protection policies have considered disability from the perspective of loss
of capacity to earn income and the need for rehabilitation and care (UN 2015). This approach
has guided the adoption of ILO Conventions 102, 121 and 128 and national disability contributory income security schemes (ILO 2017). While providing essential protection for workers,
it has cemented a dichotomy between persons with disabilities deemed able or unable to work
and participate in society contributing to schemes fostering ‘dependence, segregation and
institutionalization of persons with disabilities’ (Devandas Aguilar 2017, 46).
The human rights-based approach to disability, which contributed to the adoption of disability anti-discrimination legislations in the 1990s and the United Nations CRPD in 2006, challenged this entrenched perspective. It reconceptualised disability as the result of the interaction
between persons with impairments and diverse barriers which may restrict their participation.
This implies policies across sectors that combine the removal of barriers (awareness raising,
non-discrimination, accessibility) with the provision of required support (assistive devices,
rehabilitation, support services, social protection).

3
Calculations are based on the payment of a periodic disability benefit at 100 per cent of the full
national poverty line, granted to persons with any severe disability.

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

356

Handbook on social protection systems

While some reforms partly motivated by the intention to cut public expenditures have
had adverse effects (Beatty and Fothergill 2018; Hauben et al. 2012), this understanding of
disability has led to significant evolutions in social protection for persons with disabilities in
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries, with policies
that moved from passive compensation of incapacity to work to support for socio-economic
inclusion (OECD 2010; Böheim and Leoni 2016).
19.2.3

The Importance of Understanding Disability-Related Costs

Many social protection policies in LICs and MICs have not adequately factored in
disability-related costs (Braithwaite and Mont 2009; Mitra et al. 2017; Carraro and Castro
Cumpa 2014), which vary depending on support requirements, barriers, health-care needs and
the level of participation of persons with disabilities. They comprise:
●● Indirect costs, such as loss of earnings due to barriers faced in education and employment,
as well as the opportunity cost for family members providing support (Hanass-Hancock et
al. 2017).
●● Direct costs related to greater consumption of ordinary goods and services such as health
care or private transport and disability-specific services such as assistive devices, personal
assistance, sign language interpretation, etc.
●● These costs, unaffordable for most, limit their capacity to convert income into the same
standard of living and level of participation as those without disabilities.
While inclusive public transportation, labour markets and public services will eventually
lower some barriers, other expenses such as assistive devices or personal assistance may be
incompressible, irrespective of the environment.
Most studies carried out to assess disability-related expenditures use the Standard of Living
method, which estimates the additional resources needed by a household with a person with
disability to achieve the same standard of living as an otherwise similar household without
a person with disability. Additional expenditure ranges from 16 per cent to 70 per cent of
average income (Mitra et al. 2017), with greater costs for those with severe disabilities.
Adjusting the poverty line in light of the additional costs increases the poverty rate for
households with persons with disabilities from 18 per cent to 34 per cent in Cambodia (Palmer
et al. 2015) and 38.5 per cent to 52.9 per cent in Ghana (Asuman, Ackah and Agyire-Tettey
2020). This points to the importance of disability-adjusted poverty lines (Braithwaite and
Mont 2009) and higher eligibility thresholds for means tests in social assistance programmes.
One shortcoming of the Standard of Living method is that it does not provide insight into
the diversity of costs or what additional expenses are required to achieve equal access and
participation. One of the few studies in LICs and MICs (South African Department of Social
Development 2016) assessing indirect and direct disability-related costs showed that costs
vary greatly according to the level of support required and participation (see Figure 19.1). The
minimum costs reflect lower levels of socio-economic participation with costs being pushed
onto the family, while the maximum includes for instance transport and paid human assistance
used by those who seek participation.
For people with significant support needs, disability-related costs represented up to 15 times
the national poverty line (Statistics South Africa 2017). With a disability grant, comparatively
higher in South Africa than in most LICs and MICs (UN DESA 2018), many persons with

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Disability inclusion and social protection 357
disabilities, including those living in non-poor households, cannot cover their common and
disability-related expenses (Hanass-Hancock et al. 2017).

Sources: Author’s own illustration based on DSD South Africa, 2015, South African Rand converted to USD by
author using EC-infoeuro rate for January 2014).

Figure 19.1

19.3

Disability-related costs per group of persons with disabilities

TOWARDS INCLUSIVE SOCIAL PROTECTION SYSTEMS
SUPPORTING EMPOWERMENT OF PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES

Making social protection systems inclusive requires first understanding the diversity of
persons with disabilities, the inequalities and barriers they face and the support they require.
Second, delivery mechanisms must be fully accessible. Finally, it requires investments in
a blend of cash transfers, in-kind support, including services.
19.3.1

Understanding the Situation Support Requirements

Disability statistics
Since the World Disability Report (WHO and World Bank 2011), there has been a global
consensus that 15 per cent of the world adult population4 live with some form of disability
and 3 to 4 per cent experiences significant difficulties. However, disability prevalence at
national level remains a debated issue. The few censuses or surveys that identified people as
having a disability did so through questions such as ‘Do you have a disability?’ and/or a list of
4
Estimates for people aged 60 years were up to 43.4 per cent and for children below 15 years old
5.4 per cent.

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

358

Handbook on social protection systems

predefined disability/impairment/health conditions. Such an approach led to low prevalence
estimates capturing mostly persons with very significant disabilities. Additionally, many older
people, who do not self-identify as being ‘disabled’, would not be counted.
In the last decade, the Washington Group’s short set of questions,5 based on a functional
approach which does not carry such stigma, has become the standard recommended by most
United Nations agencies and the World Bank (Tiberti and Costa 2020) and is increasingly
used around the world (Groce and Mont 2017). It is easily implementable and cost-effective,
generating more reliable and internationally comparable estimates (Madans et al. 2011). The
requirement to disaggregate statistical and administrative data by disability under the CRPD
(Article 31) and for the monitoring of the SDGs has further fuelled its use.
Other stand-alone surveys have been developed to provide more detailed insights into the
situation of persons with disabilities and the barriers they face, such as the World Health
Organization Model Disability Survey6 and the SINTEF surveys.7 This significant progress
has contributed to break the invisibility of persons with disabilities in data.
Direct engagement
The unique perspective of persons with disabilities’ lived experience is critical to providing
data with context and meaning in relation to the barriers they face, the type of support they
value or the groups that are most marginalised. As universal and adequate coverage can only
be achieved progressively, it is critical to consult with representative organisations of persons
with disability to prioritise resource allocation and phase investments. Such consultation at
all stages of policy development is an obligation of the national government under the CRPD
(Article 4.3) to ensure systematic inclusion. In addition, such meaningful engagement will
lead to greater ownership and advocacy that is critical for social protection reforms requiring
significant resources and political will.
Disability assessments
Disability assessments can produce a better understanding of individual support requirements.
Until recently, most countries used medical assessments focused on health conditions and
impairments (medical model). While valued for their apparent objectivity, they leave out
significant parts of what constitutes disability and provide little information about the actual
support required. Medical assessments are often perceived as a burden by overloaded doctors
in LICs and MICs, who often do not have specific training (Kelly 2016). The United Nations
CRPD committee has consistently recommended going beyond medical assessment and considering support requirements and barriers. Additionally, the need for a medical certificate is
a significant barrier for poorer persons or those living in remote areas.
The starting point for reform, which many countries such as Armenia, Georgia and Timor
Leste have recently engaged in, should be equal and effective access to all persons with disabilities to the assessment mechanism. A few countries have therefore moved away from medical
assessment as the main requirement and introduced simple instruments,8 used by village

See www​.washingtongroup​-disability​.com/​ for more details.
See www​.who​.int/​disabilities/​data/​mds/​en/​ for more details.
7
See www​.sintef​.no/​en/​projects/​studies​-on​-living​-conditions/​ for more details.
8
Countries have been adapting or combining tools such as the Functional Independence Measure,
the Washington Group’s short set of questions, WHODAS 2.0 and the Disability Creation Process.
5
6

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Disability inclusion and social protection 359
committees as in Vietnam (Banks et al. 2018b) or social workers as in Fiji (Pacific Disability
Forum 2018). They identify functional limitations and/or the person’s support requirements
in carrying out basic daily life activities. A medical certificate is required only when there is
no clear decision, or in case of an appeal, and its costs are partly borne by the administration.
In Fiji, the process has been implemented in close collaboration with organisations of persons
with disabilities guaranteeing strong ownership and support.
Information collected during assessments is not only useful to determine eligibility but can
also be used to inform policy planning. Some countries have developed systems to use this
information, such as Senegal with a disability registry related to its Equal Opportunity Card, or
France which has recently launched a national information system for all the centres in charge
of disability assessment. Combined with statistical data, such registries can guide schemes and
policy design, facilitate the planning costing and budget by extending social protection. They
can also eliminate the need for repetitive assessments and allow fast relief to persons with
disability during times of crises, as the recent COVID-19 pandemic has illustrated.
19.3.2

Making Delivery Mechanisms Inclusive

Recent studies highlight distance, administrative complexity, inaccessibility of information
and facilities and exclusionary design as important barriers to access (Banks et al. 2018a,
2018b; Kidd et al. 2018, 2019a, 2019b). Many of those barriers stem from a lack of awareness
of social protection personnel about the diversity of persons with disabilities and their inclusion requirements, compounded with a lack of disability-disaggregated data. For instance,
programmes which require school attendance (conditional cash transfers, school feeding,
etc.) may inadvertently discriminate against children with disabilities who are often excluded
from education and are invisible to social protection systems. Corrective measures could be to
waive the requirement or, better, to ensure that children with disabilities can actually access
schools. In Brazil, social workers collaborate with the education system to include children
benefiting from the main disability scheme (Wapling and Schjoedt 2020).
Minimum standards for accessibility and non-discrimination in operation manuals and
tenders could significantly improve access to public information, administrative forms, websites, payment points and offices. There should also be provisions for persons who are unable
to reach offices or payment points. In Fiji, eligibility determination for the disability allowance
was based on a home visit and included the delivery of identity documents, opening of a bank
account and a review of eligibility for other benefits.9 During the COVID-19 crisis, Armenia
adopted home delivery of cash transfers for persons with disabilities to lessen their risks of
being contaminated.
19.3.3

Essential Schemes

Inclusive social protection combines a diversity of schemes to provide basic income security,
to cover disability-related costs including support services as well as to grant access to health
care and other essential services, as shown in Table 19.1.

9

Exchange of author and Fiji government disability focal point, February 2020.

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

360

Handbook on social protection systems

Table 19.1

Different types of social protection schemes that can support persons with
disabilities
Childhood

Working age

Old age

Income security

Family assistance benefits

Poverty assistance, unemployment benefit, Old age pension

Coverage of

Child with disability benefit

Disability/inclusion support allowance covering disability-related costs

disability-related

Concessions

and compatible with paid work and other benefits

costs, including

Caregivers benefit

Concessions

support services

Early identification and intervention, Personal assistance schemes, third-person support benefit, caregivers

disability pension

counselling, respite care

benefit, interpreters, etc.

Health care

Universal health-care coverage, including rehabilitation and assistive technology

Interlinkage

Connection with early childhood

Economic empowerment programmes, return to work programmes,

development programmes, education public works, women’s empowerment, etc.

Sources: Author’s own based on ILO (2019); UN DESA (2018); Kidd et al. (2019a).

Often LICs or MICs do not provide such a combination, and have issues of accessibility,
adequacy or coverage. However, countries such as Georgia, Thailand, South Africa, Nepal
and Vietnam have developed some of the main building blocks. Considering the low coverage of contributory schemes in most LICs and MICs (see Chapter 3), this section focuses on
tax-financed instruments such as cash transfers, in-kind support, concessions and services.
Cash transfers
Countries have adopted different tax-financed cash transfers which can be broadly divided
into three categories depending on their purpose: basic income security, coverage of
disability-related costs and hybrids whose purpose depends on the individuals’ circumstances (see Table 19.2). Basic income security can be provided through mainstreamed or
disability-targeted cash transfers. The grant to cover additional costs can be universal or means
tested.
Hybrid benefits are universal individual disability benefits, which are provided regardless
of a person’s income from work such as in Namibia, and regardless of other public support as
in Thailand, Georgia and Fiji. For persons with disabilities with no or low income they act as
income security. For those who have work or live in non-poor or otherwise supported households they tend to cover disability-related costs.
In-kind support and concessions
Most high-income countries and many LICs and MICs grant a wide diversity of in-kind
support and concessions which can be categorised in three broad groups: free goods and services, discounts or subsidies and exemption on taxation. In-kind support and concessions can
respond directly to a disability-related need such as health care, assistive devices or support
services which are quite costly and cannot be covered by a basic disability allowance. Other
concessions such as free public transportation or tax exemption for disability card holders can
contribute to offset some disability-related costs.
Concessions that appear to be the most valued are free or heavily subsidised health care,
assistive devices and transport and housing and utility bill subsidies. Income tax exemptions
are valued in countries with a wide formal sector as they provide relief to many parents of
children with disabilities and increase benefits of entering the formal economy.

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Disability inclusion and social protection 361
Table 19.2

Selected examples of cash transfer schemes for persons with disabilities and
their families

Cash transfers
Mainstream and poverty
targeted

Basic income security
Disability-related costs
Household benefits

Hybrid

Philippines

Poverty and partially disability Ethiopia, Ghana, Rwanda,
targeted

Tanzania, Malawi and Uganda
Brazil Continuous Cash Benefit Benefits for households with persons

Poverty and disability targeted

Programme for children with

requiring permanent care (Kenya,

disabilities

Indonesia)

Affluence tested and disability

Child disability grant (South Africa,

targeted

Mauritius)
Asignación Universal por Hijo

Mainstream universal

(Argentina)
Special maintenance allowance

Disability targeted universal
Mainstream and poverty
targeted

(Namibia)
Individual benefits
Old age pension (India)
Brazil Continuous Cash Benefit

Poverty and disability targeted

Programme for children with
disabilities

Affluence tested and disability
targeted
Mainstream universal

Disability grant (South Africa)

Grant-in-aid (South Africa)

Old age pension (Georgia,
Lesotho, Mauritius)
Disability allowance

Universal disability targeted

Disability pension (Timor

Third-person support allowance

(Fiji, Mauritius,

Leste)

(Mauritius)

Vietnam, Thailand,
Georgia, Nepal)

Sources: Kidd et al. (2019a); World Bank and ILO (2016); Banks et al. (2018c); Pacific Disability Forum (2018);
Chiripanhura and Niño-Zarazúa (2013); Cirillo and Tebaldi (2016).

In many LICs and MICs, concessions have been unsystematically adopted by successive governments leading to a patchwork of measures that might not be the most efficient or progressive. For instance, income tax credits or duty tax exemptions in countries with large informal
sectors mostly benefit better-off residents, while free health care and public transportation
benefit all persons with disabilities and have the greatest impact on the most vulnerable.
Access to health care, including rehabilitation and assistive technology
Persons with disabilities are more likely to have unmet general and disability-related
health-care needs and to face catastrophic health expenditures (WHO and World Bank 2011;
Bright and Kuper 2018; Kuper and Heydt 2019). The vast majority needing assistive devices
do not access them (Rohwerder 2018).
Countries like Vietnam, Tunisia, Ghana and the Philippines have adopted subsidies to
public health insurance which are sometimes more valued by persons with disabilities than
low disability cash transfer (Banks et al. 2018c), reflecting the importance of covering

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

362

Handbook on social protection systems

health-care costs. However, national packages often miss essential specific services such as
rehabilitation and assistive devices (Bright et al. 2018). The Philippines (Bundoc et al. 2019)
and Vietnam (Banks et al. 2018b) have recently expanded those services within their universal
health-care package10 while Georgia and Kenya cover or subsidise some assistive devices from
different budgetary sources (Kabare 2018).
Access to support services
Support services such as personal assistance, sign language interpreters, circles of support for
persons with intellectual disabilities and respite services are critical for both the survival and
basic socio-economic participation of many persons with significant disabilities (UN 2017).
Unfortunately, globally, most of the support has to be provided by families due to a lack of
publicly funded support services, with little to no such services in LICs and MICs (WHO and
World Bank 2011). This deprives persons with disabilities of equal opportunities for education, work and independent life, creates significant opportunity costs for households, increases
the risks of neglect and abuse of children and adults alike (Kelly 2019) and burns out family
members who are providing support, often women and girls. In some regions, such as in
Europe and Central Asia, the lack of investment in support services maintains an overreliance
on residential institutions (UNICEF 2013, 2019; Petrowski et al. 2017).
In OECD countries, social protection has played a key role in the development and financing of existing support services. In the Global South, few research or pilot programmes exist
on how best to provide such support, including via cash-plus interventions (Roelen et al. 2017)
(see Chapter 14). Thailand and Tunisia are among the few LICs and MICs that are working
on developing personal assistance service schemes. Recently attention has grown in LICs and
MICs on the significant gap in long-term care services for older persons (Feng 2019). This
could open a window of opportunity to think more broadly about the development of support
services across the life cycle providing that it is framed with the objective of inclusion in the
community and not institutionalisation. The challenge remains in any case to find culturally
acceptable and viable approaches that progressively develop services while fostering choice
and control of persons with disabilities as well as gender equality.
19.3.4

Inclusive Programming

Inclusive combinations of scheme
In their efforts to provide more support to persons with disabilities and their families, LICs
and MICs have taken different approaches in phasing and combining the different schemes.
Senegal and the Philippines have adopted a disability or equal opportunity card to provide
access to in-kind support and concessions, including health care, and are now moving towards
the adoption of cash transfers. South Africa, Brazil, Nepal and Georgia started early on with
disability benefits for children and adults with disabilities, complemented with concessions.
Fiji started with household poverty assistance benefits partially targeting disability and old
age, before creating a stand-alone disability allowance and social pension, together with
transport and health-care concessions. All, however, converge towards a combination of
The World Health Organization has developed a priority assistive product list to guide inclusion
in a universal health-care package, see www​.who​.int/​phi/​implementation/​assistive​_technology/​low​_res​
_english​.pdf
10

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Disability inclusion and social protection 363
cash transfers, in-kind support and concessions, unfortunately with few countries investing in
support services to date.
Many countries are also developing more accessible disability assessments that consider
support requirements, together with national disability registries and disability/equal opportunity cards to streamline access of persons with disabilities to different benefits. Those evolutions increasingly acknowledge the central issue of disability-related costs. Still, significant
differences exist as to whether those evolutions are framed by a shift towards inclusion.
Many countries have adopted schemes that are often poverty targeted, with low coverage
and low value, based on a dichotomy between those deemed able and unable to work, and that
emphasise the need for care. Some countries are in-between such as South Africa or Brazil:
both have cash transfers that are relatively high in value, wide in coverage and also that cover
children with disability, but cash transfers to adults with disability are based on their incapacity to work. While Brazil has poverty-targeted disability schemes compared to affluence-tested
schemes in South Africa, it has initiated a challenging reform process to support persons with
disabilities who start working.
Fiji, Georgia, Nepal, Thailand, Vietnam and Mauritius, among others, started shifting
towards support for inclusion and economic empowerment, adopting a combination of universal schemes across the life cycle that are compatible with work and sometimes with other
benefits.
Inclusive design choices
There are some general design choices to be considered that can have significant impact on
effective support for inclusion of a given scheme. These include:
●● Individual versus household as recipient: While cash transfers for children with disabilities
are paid to parents, it is critical that benefits for adults are paid to themselves, including
caregiver grants or vouchers, to foster control over the benefits. Some countries have
adapted their household schemes to reflect disability-related costs with higher eligibility thresholds, as in Moldova (Carraro and Castro Cumpa 2014), Tunisia and Palestine
(ESCWA 2017), or a disability top-up such as in Indonesia (Rahayu Kusumastuti et al.
2018). If this approach seems convenient at first, it is unlikely that it would effectively
empower persons with disabilities, as they have very low control over benefits received by
households. Even if individual disability benefits are often too low to foster autonomy and
may be used for household consumption (Kidd et al. 2018; Banks et al. 2018a, 2018b), the
person’s contribution can have a positive impact on their agency and social position (Banks
et al. 2018a, 2018b) and may help them secure support from family members (Kelly 2019).
●● Universal versus poverty targeting: While income security schemes are often means
tested or poverty targeted, schemes aimed at coverage of disability-related costs or
hybrid schemes tend to be universal or affluence tested. Georgia, Mauritius and South
Africa’s well-resourced universal or affluence-tested schemes cover around 3 per cent
of the working age population on a par with many OECD countries. Countries with
poverty-targeted schemes such as Kenya, India or Indonesia have expectedly much lower
coverage, with a high risk of exclusion errors due to a combination of inherent challenges
of poverty targeting with issues in disability determination (Kidd et al. 2019a).
●● Adequacy: Whether universal or poverty targeted, most existing schemes offer low benefits, insufficient for covering basic expenses let alone disability-related extra costs. Few

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

364

Handbook on social protection systems

countries provide relatively high coverage and high levels of benefits such as Georgia,
Mauritius, South Africa (50 per cent of minimum wage) and Brazil (minimum wage).
●● Compatibility with work: Many schemes have incapacity to work as an explicit or implicit
criterion and are often the only support available. While the overall impact on labour
supply might be low in countries with high structural unemployment (Mitra 2010),
this criterion may create undesirable disincentives for persons with disability and their
households. Engaging in economic activity means risking losing the main stable source of
income. Also, such benefits are often incompatible with programmes such as vocational
training or support for small businesses. On top of this, a fair assessment of the inability
to work is challenging (Kelly 2016). A few LMICs have avoided these issues by adopting
universal disability benefits compatible with paid work.
●● Compatibility with other benefits: To be effective, cash transfers covering disability-related
costs should also be compatible with other cash benefits. In Thailand or South Africa, old
age pension recipients requiring human assistance are eligible for additional disability
benefit. Unfortunately, in many countries cash transfers are mutually exclusive which
undermines their effectiveness.

19.4

CONCLUSION

The review of LMICs experiences shows that while no system has it all, their efforts to support
inclusion of persons with disabilities are slowly drawing a road towards an inclusive social
protection system. This includes:
1. Better understanding of the situation of persons with disabilities and their extra costs
through collection and analysis of disability data, consultation with persons with disabilities and easily accessible disability assessments focused on support requirements.
2. National disability registries and disability/equal opportunity cards that facilitate access to
diverse schemes and greater responsiveness in crisis.
3. Investment ensuring accessibility and non-discrimination across social protection schemes
so that persons with disabilities can make the most of existing programmes.
4. A meaningful combination of cash transfers, in-kind support, including support services,
and concessions. Considering LIC and MIC resource limitations, the hybrid universal
disability support allowance scheme – compatible with work and further public support –
together with free or heavily subsidised health care, assistive devices, public transportation
and support services seems to have become a blueprint.

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Disability inclusion and social protection 365

REFERENCES
Asuman, D., C.G. Ackah, and F. Agyire-Tettey (2020). Disability and Household Welfare in Ghana:
Costs and Correlates. Journal of Family and Economic Issues, 1–17.
Banks, L.M., M. Walsham, S. Neupane, Y. Pradhananga, M. Maharjan, K. Blanchet and H. Kuper
(2018a). Disability-inclusive social protection in Nepal: A national overview with a case study from
Tanahun district. International Centre for Evidence in Disability Research Report. London.
Banks, L.M., M. Walsham, H. Van Minh, V. Duy Kien, V. Quynh Mai, T. Thu Ngan, B. Bich Phuong,
D. Ha Son, N. Bao Ngoc, D. Thi Thuy Duong, K. Blanchet and H. Kuper (2018b). Disability-inclusive
social protection in Vietnam: A national overview with a case study from Cam Le district. International
Centre for Evidence in Disability Research Report. London.
Banks, L.M., H. Kuper and S. Polack (2018c). Poverty and disability in low- and middle-income countries: A systematic review. PLOS ONE 13 (9), e0204881.
Beatty, C. and S. Fothergill (2018). Welfare reform in the United Kingdom 2010–16: Expectations,
outcomes, and local impacts. Social Policy and Administration 52 (5), 950–68.
Böheim, R. and T. Leoni (2016). Disability policies: Reform strategies in a comparative perspective (No.
w22206). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Braithwaite, J. and D. Mont (2009). Disability and poverty: A survey of World Bank poverty assessments
and implications. Alter 3 (3), 219–32.
Bright, T. and H. Kuper (2018). A systematic review of access to general healthcare services for
people with disabilities in low and middle income countries. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health 15 (9), 1879.
Bright, T., S. Wallace and H. Kuper (2018). A systematic review of access to rehabilitation for people
with disabilities in low-and middle-income countries. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health 15 (10), 2165.
Bundoc, J., I.I.I. Melanio Mauricio, G.M. Regis, P.M. Valera and M.R. David (2019). Development
of a financing mechanism for assistive technologies through the Philippine Health Insurance
Corporation. Global Perspectives on Assistive Technology, 515.
Carraro, L. and M. Castro Cumpa (2014). Accounting for different needs when identifying the poor
and targeting social assistance. Paper prepared for the IARIW 33rd General Conference, Rotterdam,
24–30 August.
Chiripanhura, B. and M. Niño-Zarazúa (2013). Social safety nets in Namibia: Structure, effectiveness
and the possibility for a universal cash transfer scheme. www​.bon​.com​.na/​CMSTemplates/​Bon/​Files/​
bon​.com​.na/​88/​8836bf27​-7f47​-4b0c​-9744​-f124611e6abb​.pdf
Cirillo, C. and R. Tebaldi (2016). Social protection in Africa: Inventory of non-contributory programmes.
International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth Working Paper.
Devandas Aguilar, C. (2017). Social protection and persons with disabilities. International Social
Security Review 70, 45–65.
Diwakar, V. and A. Shepherd (2018). Sustaining escapes from poverty. Working Paper 539. London:
Overseas Development Institute. www​.odi​.org/​publications/​11214​-sustaining​-escapes​-poverty
Durán Valverde, F., J.F. Pacheco-Jiménez, T. Muzaffar and H. Elizondo-Barboza (2020). Financing gaps
in social protection: Global estimates and strategies for developing countries in light of the COVID-19
crisis and beyond, ILO Working Paper (Geneva, ILO).
ESCWA (2017). Strengthening social protection for persons with disabilities in Arab countries. https://​
reliefweb​.int/​sites/​reliefweb​.int/​files/​resources/​social​-protection​-persons​-disabilities​-english​.pdf
Eurostat (2020). Disability statistics: Poverty and income inequalities. https://​ec​.europa​.eu/​eurostat/​
statistics​-explained/​index​.php​?title​=​Disability​_statistics​_​-​_poverty​_and​_income​_inequalities​&​oldid​
=​515162​#Being​_at​-risk​-of​-poverty​_or​_social​_exclusion​_​.28AROPE​.29:​_higher​_prevalence​_among​
_the​_population​_with​_activity​_limitation
Feng, Z. (2019). Global convergence: Aging and long-term care policy challenges in the developing
world. Journal of Aging and Social Policy 31 (4), 291–7.
Grammenos, S. (2016). Adequate standard of living and social protection (Article 28 of UN CRPD):
Statistical indicators annex to the Academic Network of European Disability Experts (ANED). Social
protection for disabled people in Europe: Synthesis report by R. Sainsbury, A.M.M. Lawson and M.
Priestley.

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

366

Handbook on social protection systems

Groce, N.E. and D. Mont (2017). Counting disability: Emerging consensus on the Washington Group
questionnaire. The Lancet Global Health 5 (7), e649–e650.
Hanass-Hancock, J., S. Nene, N. Deghaye and S. Pillay (2017). ‘These are not luxuries, it is essential for
access to life’: Disability related out-of-pocket costs as a driver of economic vulnerability in South
Africa. African Journal of Disability 6, 1–10.
Hauben, H., M. Coucheir, J. Spooren, D. McAnaney and C. Delfosse (2012). Assessing the impact of
European governments’ austerity plans on the rights of people with disabilities. European Foundation
Centre and Bernard Brunhes International/BPI Group.
ILO (2017). World social protection report 2017–19: Universal social protection to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. Geneva: International Labour Office, 66–73.
ILO (2019). Joint statement: Towards inclusive social protection system supporting full and effective
participation of persons with disabilities. www​.social​-protection​.org/​gimi/​gess/​RessourcePDF​.action​
?ressource​.ressourceId​=​54258
Kabare, K. (2018). Social protection and disability in Kenya. Nairobi: Development Pathways.
Kelly, G. (2016). Hard and soft medicine: Doctors’ framing and application of the disability category in
their assessments of grant claimants’ fitness to work in South Africa. Working Paper No. 384. Centre
for Social Science Research University of Cape Town.
Kelly, G. (2019). Disability, cash transfers and family practices in South Africa. Critical Social Policy
39 (4), 541–59.
Kidd, S., L. Wapling, D.B. Athias and A. Tran (2018). Social protection and disability in South Africa.
Development Pathways.
Kidd, S., L. Wapling, R. Schjoedt, B. Gelders, D.B. Athias and A. Tran (2019a). Leave no one behind:
Building inclusive social protection systems for persons with disabilities. Development Pathways.
Kidd, S., L. Wapling and K. Kabare (2019b). Social protection and disability in Zambia. Development
Pathways.
Kuper, H. and P. Heydt (2019). The missing billion: Access to health services for one billion people with
disabilities. www​.lshtm​.ac​.uk/​TheMissingBillion
Larasati, D., K. Huda, A. Côte, S.K. Rahayu and M. Siyaranamual (2019). Policy brief: Inclusive social
protection for persons with disability in Indonesia. TNP2K.
Madans, J.H., M.E. Loeb and B.M. Altman (2011). Measuring disability and monitoring the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities: The work of the Washington Group on
Disability Statistics. BMC Public Health 11 (4), 1–8.
Mitra, S. (2010). Disability cash transfers in the context of poverty and unemployment: The case of South
Africa. World Development 38 (12), 1692–709.
Mitra, S. (2018). Disability, Health and Human Development. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mitra, S., M. Palmer, H. Kim, D. Mont and N. Groce (2017). Extra costs of living with a disability:
A review and agenda for research. Disability and Health Journal 10 (4), 475–84.
Mizunoya, S. and S. Mitra (2013). Is there a disability gap in employment rates in developing countries? World Development 42, 28–43.
Mizunoya, S., S. Mitra and I. Yamasaki (2016). Towards inclusive education: The impact of disability on
school attendance in developing countries. UNICEF. www​.unicef​-irc​.org/​publications/​845​-towards​
-inclusive​-education​-the​-impact​-of​-disability​-on​-school​-attendance​-in​-developing​.html
OECD (2010). Sickness, disability and work: Breaking the barriers: A synthesis of findings across
OECD countries. OECD Publishing.
Pacific Disability Forum (2018). From recognition to realisation of rights, furthering partnership for an
inclusive Pacific 2030, 18.
Palmer, M., N. Groce, D. Mont, O.H. Nguyen and S. Mitra (2015). The economic lives of people with
disabilities in Vietnam. PLOS ONE July.
Petrowski, N., C. Cappa and P. Gross (2017). Estimating the number of children in formal alternative
care: Challenges and results. Child Abuse and Neglect 70, 388–98.
Rahayu Kusumastuti, S., D. Larasati, M. Siyaranamual, K. Huda, S. Kidd and B. Gelders (2018). The
Future of The Social Protection System in Indonesia: Social Protection for All. Jakarta: TNP2K
Publications.
Roelen, K., S. Devereux, A.G. Abdulai, B. Martorano, T. Palermo and L.P. Ragno (2017). How to make
‘cash plus’ work: Linking cash transfers to services and sectors. UNICEF Office of Research.

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Disability inclusion and social protection 367
Rohwerder, B. (2018). Assistive technologies in developing countries. K4D Helpdesk Report. Brighton:
Institute of Development Studies.
South African Department of Social Development (2016). Elements of the financial and economic
costs of disability to households in South Africa. Results from a pilot study. Johannesburg: DSD and
UNICEF.
Statistics South Africa (2017). Poverty trends in South Africa: An examination of absolute poverty in
South Africa between 2006 and 2015. www​.statssa​.gov​.za/​publications/​Report​-03​-10​-06/​Report​-03​
-10​-062015​.pdf
Tiberti, M. and V. Costa (2020). Disability measurement in household surveys: A guidebook for designing household survey questionnaires. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Trani, J.F., P. Bakhshi, S. Myers Tlapek, D. Lopez and F. Gall (2015). Disability and poverty in Morocco
and Tunisia: A multidimensional approach. Journal of Human Development and Capabilities 16 (4),
518–48.
UN (2015). Report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of persons with disabilities: Social protection.
A/70/297.
UN (2017). Report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of persons with disabilities: Access to
rights-based support for persons with disabilities. A/HRC/34/58.
UN DESA (2018). UN flagship report on disability and development 2018: Realizing the SDGs by, for
and with persons with disabilities. www​.un​.org/​development/​desa/​disabilities/​publication​-disability​
-sdgs​.html
UN DESA (2020). Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. www​.un​.org/​development/​desa/​
disabilities/​convention​-on​-the​-rights​-of​-persons​-with​-disabilities​.html
UNICEF (2013). Children under the age of three in formal care in Eastern Europe and Central Asia:
A rights-based regional situation analysis. https://​bettercarenetwork​.org/​library/​particular​-threats​-to​
-childrens​-care​-and​-protection/​effects​-of​-institutional​-care/​children​-under​-the​-age​-of​-three​-in​-formal​
-care​-in​-eastern​-europe​-and​-central​-asia​-a​-rights​-based
UNICEF (2019). Inclusive social protection systems for children with disabilities in Europe and Central
Asia. Social Protection Regional Issue Brief 3.
Wapling, L. and R. Schjoedt (2020). Social protection and disability in Brazil. Development Pathways.
WHO and World Bank (2011). World report on disability. www​
.who​
.int/​
teams/​
noncommunicable​
-diseases/​sensory​-functions​-disability​-and​-rehabilitation/​world​-report​-on​-disability
World Bank and ILO (2016). Universal social protection: Country cases. Global Partnership for
Universal Social Protection. USP2030.

Alexandre Côte - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:32:19AM
via William and Mary School of Law

