Case study L: Gender analysis of social protection
in Iran
Ali Akbar Tajmazinani and Maryam Ebrahimi

1

INTRODUCTION

Women face multiple roles and problems throughout their daily lives especially in societies
like Iran, where women are expected to play most domestic roles even if they are employed.
They usually enjoy a smaller share of financial income, despite doing several activities at work
and at home. Statistics show that women face greater poverty relative to men and this situation
is exacerbated for female-headed households. A study over a 10-year period shows that the
poverty rate of female-headed households has always been higher than that of male-headed
households, and being a woman, one is more likely to fall into the poverty trap (Khaajevand
2015). It has been found that 43.3 percent of all female-headed households fall into the two
lowest economic deciles, while this figure is 16.8 percent for male-headed households (Ali
Akbari Saba 2017). Due to unequal conditions with men in the labor market, cultural constraints and social responsibilities, women have less opportunity to be in the formal economy
and enjoy benefits of social security (Jabari 2003).
Accordingly, women face multiple issues and gender-specific risks throughout their lives
that require a variety of social security programs. Hence, gender-sensitive policymaking in
the area of social protection could improve women’s situation. This study therefore seeks to
analyze the gender sensitivity of social protection policies in Iran.

2

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

There are many important issues in the analysis of social security policies with regard to
gender, inter alia: Are women and men treated equally in policies? Who receives social benefits and services and are governmental benefits credited directly to the husband’s account?
Do policies consider women in the private or public sphere? Which aspects of different experiences of men and women are considered in policies and in what ways are policies generally
sensitive to gender?
One of the most important topics is the gender division of labor that explains the presence
of both sexes in the private or public spheres. By assessing this division of labor, the type of
citizenship that policymakers prefer for women can be identified. According to Fraser, ‘the
family-wage ideal [a wage that is sufficient to provide for a family] was inscribed in the structure of most industrial-era welfare states’ (Fraser 1997, 42). Criticisms about the male breadwinner and female housekeeper roles due to creating subordinate citizenship for women have
drawn greater attention to women’s presence in the public sphere and enhanced the universal
breadwinner (similar citizenship) model (Fitzpatrick 2004, 149). However, this model is
criticized since it asks women to resemble men, especially in terms of waged employment
349
Ali Akbar Tajmazinani and Maryam Ebrahimi - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:31:26AM
via William and Mary School of Law

350

Handbook on social protection systems

and work outside home, to be recognized as an independent individual and enjoy direct social
security coverage.
In the caregiver parity (differential citizenship) model, women’s labor in the private
sphere is recognized the same as women’s labor in the public sphere, with the main criticism
being that such an approach consolidates women’s position in the private sphere. In the next
model titled as the universal caregiver (critical synthesis citizenship) model, both men and
women have access to the private and public spheres. Although it has been criticized by
conservative perspectives as ignoring natural differences between men and women as well
as weakening the family institution, proponents argue that through application of this model
both sexes somehow share equal responsibilities and opportunities with regard to wage and
non-wage work (Fitzpatrick 2004).
Each of the above-mentioned models has different effects on women’s status. In the
subordinate citizenship model, women’s individuality is ignored and women’s dependency
increases. Fathers also have less opportunity to play their paternal and spousal roles due to
their overwhelming presence in the public sphere, which is even more critical given the current
financial problems and economic crises in developing countries. The universal breadwinner
model ignores the differences between men and women, different feminine experiences as well
as higher pressures on women due to their dual responsibilities in the workplace alongside
motherhood and care. The universal caregiver model empowers women, especially in the
public sphere, while increasing the number of insured persons and offering greater opportunities for insurance funds.

3

FINDINGS

Findings of this case study are derived from broader mixed-method research which used
content analysis of all policy documents adopted after the 1979 Islamic Revolution,
semi-structured interviews with gender policy key informants as well as secondary analysis
of quantitative data on social protection. Data provided by the Social Security Organization
show that the number of main insured persons has been rising and that the gender gap has been
shrinking. While the number of main male insured persons was 17 times higher than that of
females in 1986, it was less than five times more in 2016 (Social Security Organization 2012,
2016). Given that the benefits of compulsory insurance are dependent on wage and salary
earnings from employment under the Social Security Law and that women’s employment rate
is low, the gap between male and female insurance coverage rates is high.
Various models can be identified in the set of adopted policy documents relating to women
and specific social security laws. In some laws, the policymaker has taken a similar citizenship
(universal breadwinner model) approach for both sexes. One of these categories is the right
to equal entitlement. The right to benefit from social security services is set out in various
laws. Among them are Article 29 of the Constitution and various development programs, as
well as the Charter of the Rights and Responsibilities of Women that stated the equal right to
social security for women. Despite the existence of this general ‘equal rights’ approach, more
specific and executive legislation may follow other approaches.
Policymakers considered expanding kindergartens to reduce the burden of women’s caring
responsibilities and enforce the dual breadwinner model; in other words, they followed outsourcing care tasks instead of involving men in caring responsibilities. As per Article 78 of

Ali Akbar Tajmazinani and Maryam Ebrahimi - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:31:26AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Case study L 351
the Labor Law, employers are required to establish childcare centers, but this provision has not
been practically enforceable due to economic conditions and a lack of enforcement requirements. According to Kardavani et al. (2017), policies to reduce governmental employment
have led to the closure of public kindergartens. The development of public kindergartens does
not seem to be a government priority. This policy has gradually reduced the number of public
kindergartens and instead introduced childcare benefits to be spent at private kindergartens,
which are generally costly. Policymakers have looked at maternal leave for the return of
women to the public sphere, which has been on the rise in the post-revolutionary period.
Overall, it can be concluded that policymakers, despite a generally supportive approach
towards women, have followed the turnaround from the social assistance approach to the
social insurance approach. For example, Article 39 of the Fifth Five-Year Development Plan
provides for an actual shift of 10 percent among households from social assistance schemes
to social insurance schemes. In fact, the premiums of these people are paid by the government
until they are able to become independent.
Another model that can be identified in the existing policies is the caregiver parity model.
That is to say that policymakers have sought to value women’s domestic work. One of these
measures is equalizing through insurance. This means that housewives can also insure
themselves and receive pensions like employees. Since, according to Seager and Madani
Ghahfarkhi (2016), more than half of women have always been housewives, a plan such as
housewives insurance can cover a large part of the female population. According to Rezaei
et al. (2012), the initial proposal was made in 2000 and was budgeted for three years but
withdrawn from the agenda due to its financial burden. It returned to policymakers’ attention
in the next administration but, again, was not given sufficient priority to secure a consistent
and stable budget. Other measures to finance women are alimony and dowry rights for women
which are mentioned in various laws and could be enforced by the court if the husband refrains
from their payment.
The universal caregiver model could also be identified to a lesser extent in the existing laws.
In some laws, policymakers grant women the right to have their spouses’ support and participation in child upbringing (which may be seen as encouraging men and granting them the right
to engage in the private sphere), but due to the dominance of the male breadwinner and female
housekeeper model, domestic responsibilities are almost always left to women. Policymakers
have raised a type of leave called paternity leave in recent years. Although this policy seems to
have increased men’s presence at home, its primary motivation was to encourage childbearing.
Nevertheless, the model that prevails over women’s policies as a whole is subordinate citizenship. This model also overshadows the specific social security law: in different laws, men
are the head of the family and entrusted with the task of breadwinning. Men are considered
the main recipients of aid such as child benefit and family allowance, and women only receive
benefits if they are the head of the family.
As women are not considered responsible for family livelihood, there is a generous
approach towards female survivors in social security laws. According to these laws, the wife
and daughters of an insured man can enjoy the right of survivorship as long as they are single
and could even qualify after divorce. Boys can benefit from this pension until they are 25
years old. Another difference in the approach of social security policies is different retirement
criteria for men and women, including in terms of years of employment record and early
retirement. Given the assumption that the responsibilities of the private sphere are entrusted to
women, policymakers have always sought to increase women’s presence at home.

Ali Akbar Tajmazinani and Maryam Ebrahimi - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:31:26AM
via William and Mary School of Law

352

4

Handbook on social protection systems

CONCLUSION

It can be argued that the social security system in Iran divides women into three general
categories. The first group, which comprises a small proportion of the female population, is
in wage employment and remuneration and is supported by the formal social security system.
In this group, facilities and benefits are similar to those for men. Policymakers, believing in
the priority of maternal and caring roles and women’s role in the private sphere, have put in
place provisions to reconcile the different roles of women and therefore strengthen the role of
women in the private sphere. In other words, policymakers have sought to increase maternity
leave and women’s presence at home through part-time employment. They have also sought to
reduce the duration of employment and increase women’s presence in the private sphere with
such policies as early retirement, distance working and the promotion of home-based jobs.
The second group of women is housewives who are supported by an insured man and
are indirectly supported by him based on policymakers’ interpretation, while having the option
to be self-insured through the ‘housewife insurance’ scheme, although this is dependent on
being able to pay the monthly contribution. The third category of women is the head of the
family or self-care females. Post-revolutionary administrations in this area initially focused
more on paternalistic and supportive roles, but more recently, policymakers have sought to
exclude women with the ability to live independently from their social assistance plans and
have instead encouraged them towards social insurance.
From the gender citizenship perspective, policymakers have mainly prioritized women’s
subordinate citizenship which makes women dependent and locks them into a predefined role.
Therefore, specific social protection laws should undergo reform to mitigate the existing subordinate gender status. Moreover, due to the overall economic situation, the social assistance
approach is unsafe and unreliable. Facilitating women’s presence in formal employment, in
addition to increasing the proportion of social fund support and protecting women against
financial crises, should be prioritized on the policy agenda.

REFERENCES
Ali Akbari Saba, R. (2017). Characteristics of female-headed households in different marital status
groups. www​.srtc​.ac​.ir/​Portals/​0/​23​.pdf
Fitzpatrick, T. (2004). Welfare Theory, What Is Social Policy? Translated by Hormuz Homayounpour.
Tehran: Higher Institute for Social Research.
Fraser, N. (1997). Justice Interrupts, Critical Reflection on the Post Socialist Condition. Abingdon:
Routledge.
Jabari, H. (2003). Gender attitudes to social security. Journal of Women Research 1 (6), 81–108.
Kardavani, R., A.A. Tajmazinani, E.t. Mirkhani and S.M. Sajjadi (2017). Explaining the political patterns and developments of Iranian social policy in the maternal/employment field. Journal of Women,
Humanities and Cultural Studies Institute 8 (4), 37–64.
Khaajevand, A. (2015). Evaluation of Legal Solutions for Protecting Head of Household, Malevolent
and Headless Women. Dissertation, Al-Zahra University.
Rezaei, R., M.R. Namegh and A. Arhami (2012). Social insurance plan for housewives. Expert Report
of the Social-Cultural Deputy of the Research Center of the Islamic Consultative Assembly. http://​rc​
.majlis​.ir/​fa/​report/​show/​830919

Ali Akbar Tajmazinani and Maryam Ebrahimi - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:31:26AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Case study L 353
Seager, J. and S. Madani Ghahfarkhi (2016). Women in the World and Iran. Translated by Sayed Mehdi
Khodaei. Tehran: Rozaneh.
Social Security Organization (2012). Fifty Years Report (1961–2011). www​.tamin​.ir/​html/​item/​1757
Social Security Organization (2016). Statistical yearbook of the Social Security Organization. https://​
bimeh​.mcls​.gov​.ir/​fa/​news/​70047

Ali Akbar Tajmazinani and Maryam Ebrahimi - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:31:26AM
via William and Mary School of Law

