23. Refugees and social protection
Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh

23.1

INTRODUCTION

Social protection is a right enshrined in international human rights law; yet, in practice,
its provision is often state-led and citizenship-based. This means that refugees and other
‘non-citizens’ are mostly excluded from access to benefits that the host population receives.
This fact posits a national and international policy challenge. In 2018, 65.6 million people
were displaced of which 29.4 million persons worldwide were forcibly displaced outside their
home country and classified as refugees1 or asylum seekers. Of these, 15.9 million refugees
found themselves in a protracted refugee situation2 having been displaced for at least five years
(UNHCR 2019) and an average duration of 10 years (DeVictor 2019). As a result, those refugees have lived in exile for a prolonged time, often in camps or basic housing in urban centres
and are often dependent on others to find solutions to their predicament (Merheb and Loughna
2006).3 Social protection can help refugees to improve their living situation. Therefore, the
social protection needs of refugees must be considered as a critical component of the global
and national policy agendas from a durable perspective.
While many countries in Europe have put in place measures to provide some degree of
social protection to refugees, countries in low- and middle-income countries (LICs and MICs)
often face constraints in their ability to do the same. This problem concerns about 80 per cent
of all refugees because most refugees end up in neighbouring countries to their country of
origin rather than other parts of the world (UNHCR 2019; Puerto Gomez and Christensen
2010).
Although a pledge was made under Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 1 to expand
social protection for all until 2030, this target is still far from being realised. Refugees commonly find themselves in a legally compromised status, which is often combined with asset
and income scarcity. As displacement becomes protracted, their resources are further depleted.
This places them in increasingly vulnerable positions within the host community. While this
situation is often mitigated with short-term humanitarian aid schemes by international actors
that are aimed at coping with risk, most of the time refugees become stuck in this coping limbo
of aid, with limited possibility to transition from humanitarian assistance to development
programmes (Christensen and Harild 2009; Lakhani 2013; Newland 2015). As a result, many
refugees are placed in very disadvantaged positions, which not only impacts their ability to

Of which 4.4 million fall under the responsibility of the UNRWA (UNHCR 2019).
In other words if a group of at least 25,000 individuals of the same nationality has resided in
a particular host country for five years or longer (ExCom 2004).
3
While addressing protracted refugee situations per se is beyond the scope of this chapter, it is
important to acknowledge that refugees trapped in these protracted situations often suffer severe restrictions of their human rights.
1
2

410
Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Refugees and social protection 411
achieve adequate levels of well-being, but also results in disenfranchised groups living often
a life of poverty, marginalisation, discrimination and denial of human rights.
In 2016, following the World Humanitarian Summit, the Social Protection Inter-Agency
Cooperation Board released a joint statement in which they called for the inclusion of social
protection within any strategy on forced displacement (Social Protection Inter-Agency
Coordination Board 2016). A ‘scale-up of social protection in contexts of fragility and forced
displacement [is thus needed] to ensure no one is left behind’ (Brück et al. 2019, 2). And while
impact evaluations on social protection among refugees in LICs and MICs are limited (Brück
et al. 2019; Doocy and Tappis 2016), there has been increased attention by the international
community to social protection in contexts of fragility and displacement, including discussions
on the connection between humanitarian assistance and social protection being provided to
displaced populations (e.g. Gentilini et al. 2018; Long and Sabates-Wheeler 2017; Ulrichs and
Sabates-Wheeler 2018; see Chapter 16). Yet to date, a comprehensive perspective on the role
of social protection for refugees has been lacking.
In line with this, the chapter focuses on social protection in the context of forced displacement. Section 23.2 sets out to first distinguish between the legal definitions of a refugee and an
asylum seeker. Section 23.3 outlines the differing social protection rights for both classifications. This is done with an underlying supposition that inclusivity depends on a state’s capacity
and national legal implementation, along with the support provided by international actors
for refugees to access some form of social protection. Section 23.4 specifically delineates
between the contexts of LICs and MICs versus Europe. It illustrates that access for refugees
to social protection varies and depends on a multiplicity of factors, including the host country’s legal framework, the maturity of the social protection system in place and the ability to
incorporate shock-responsive social protection (SRSP) mechanisms within social protection
programming. Finally, Section 23.5 reflects on success factors and mechanisms for integrating
refugees in social protection systems, and further explores possible linkages between social
protection and humanitarian aid in different contexts.

23.2

A RIGHTS-BASED APPROACH TO SOCIAL PROTECTION
FOR REFUGEES

The right to social protection is dependent on the legal status of the individual being a refugee
or an asylum seeker.
23.2.1

Classification of Refugee and Asylum Seeker

An asylum seeker is a person who is in the process of being recognised as a refugee by
national authorities, with, if necessary, support by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). During the procedure of status recognition, a person may be granted
temporary residence and protection while awaiting the decision.
The legal definition underlying the concept of a refugee is mainly shaped by the 1951
United Nations (UN) Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol
Relating to the Status of Refugees. Under Article 1(A)(1), a refugee is a person who ‘owing to
a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership
of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

412

Handbook on social protection systems

unable, or owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country’.
Under the Refugee Convention, a refugee has access to the rights stipulated in the convention
as well as those indicated in the national law of the host country. While the status of refugee is
based on an individual’s claim to asylum, sometimes, due to the nature of conflict, displaced
persons from the same country may receive prima facie refugee status.4
By 2015, only 148 out of 196 countries had ratified the 1951 Convention and/or the 1967
Protocol (UNHCR 2015a). However, the UNHCR may have put in place a Memorandum of
Understanding with the respective host governments that are not signatory to the convention to
at least protect the right of non-refoulement, i.e. forcible return to the country of origin. In such
a case, refugees are primarily dependent on the national law of the host country.
The above definition is widely adhered to. However, in certain regional contexts, an even
broader definition has been adopted. In 1969, the Organisation of African Unity expanded
its understanding of a refugee in the Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa to include any ‘person who, owing to external aggression, occupation,
foreign domination or events seriously disturbing public order … is compelled to leave his
place of habitual residence in order to seek refuge in another place outside his country of origin
or nationality’ under Article 1(2).
Further, the 1984 Cartagena Declaration in Latin America expanded the definition of refugees to those ‘who have fled their country because their lives, safety or freedom have been
threatened by generalised violence, foreign aggression, internal conflicts, massive violation of
human rights or other circumstances which have seriously disturbed public order’.
An exception pertains to Palestinian refugees residing in the Levant. As per Article 1(d) of
the 1951 Convention, they are not eligible to receive support from the UNHCR and fall under
the responsibility of the UN agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).5
This led to some additional challenges in recent crises, for example for the Syrian Palestinians
who fled to Jordan or Lebanon fall under UNRWA responsibility rather than UNHCR.
23.2.2

The Right to Social Protection

From a rights-based approach to social protection, social protection rights were initially
granted to all individuals, citizens and non-citizens under Articles 22 and 23 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights (see Chapter 9). While the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights in particular holds for state-led interventions, refugees who have
fled borders are still to be granted the right to social security, including social insurance, as
per Article 9.

In other words, a person who has fled no longer has the individual burden to provide a case for
refugee status but rather ‘on the basis of readily apparent, objective circumstances in the country of
origin’, displaced persons are recognised to fall within the criteria of refugee status (UNHCR 2015b).
5
For reference of the precise definition of Palestinian refugee, please refer to the Consolidated
Eligibility and Registration Instructions (UNRWA 2010).
4

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Refugees and social protection 413
Table 23.1

Rights to social protection under the 1951 Refugee Convention

Article

Right

Condition

20

Rationing system

Same treatment as nationals

21

Housing

As favourable as possible and not less favourable than that of aliens

22(1)

Elementary education

Same treatment as nationals

22(2)

Higher levels of education and the

As favourable as possible and not less favourable than that of aliens

recognition of certificates and degrees
23

Public relief and assistance

Same treatment as nationals

24(1)

Working conditions and social security

Same as nationals provided that appropriate arrangements are in
place for the acquis of rights or national laws prescribe special
arrangements for pension

Source: Authors’ own based on the 1951 Refugee Convention.

The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights stated in General Comment No. 19
that this encompasses:
the right to access and maintain benefits, whether in cash or in kind, from (a) lack of work-related
income caused by sickness, disability, maternity, employment injury, unemployment, old age, or
death of a family member; (b) unaffordable access to health care; (c) insufficient family support,
particularly children and adult dependents. (2008, para. 2)

Regardless of status, all individuals should have access to a minimum standard of
non-contributory social assistance equally and without discrimination (Sepúlveda and Nyst
2012; Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 2008, see also Chapter 9); thus,
by default, this includes refugees and asylum seekers which under para. 31 of the General
Comment are amongst those groups that should be granted special attention. While refugees
and asylum seekers may not immediately be able to benefit from social insurance schemes as
this would require prior payment of contributions (see Chapter 3), they should in fact enjoy
equal treatment with regards to access to non-contributory schemes (para. 38 of General
Comment 19). This is in line with Article 8(1)(c) of the 1985 Declaration on the Human
Rights of Individuals who are not Nationals of the Country in which They Live (UN General
Assembly 1985). This article states that refugees should be granted the right to health protection, social security and education provided no undue strain is placed on the resources of the
state and the person meets the requirement as per the legislation in place (see Chapter 9).
The 1951 Convention makes specific reference to the right to social protection in Articles 20
to 24. The extent to which refugees are entitled to rights depends on the conditions mentioned
within the article – see Table 23.1. Regardless, while the Convention has been signed by the
majority of UN member states, several countries have put in place reservations with regards
to certain rights, sometimes on the ground that these rights are only limited and available to
citizens themselves.6 While the equitableness of this stance could be arguable from a human
rights perspective, it is enduring from a legal standpoint, as countries are at liberty to ratify
conventions with reservations.

For an overview of the reservations per country, please refer to www​.unhcr​.org/​protection/​
convention/​5d9ed32b4/​states​-parties​-including​-reservations​-declarations​-1951​-refugee​-convention​
.html.
6

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

414

Handbook on social protection systems

While the right to social security, including social assistance, is seemingly guaranteed in
international law, the effective access of refugees and asylum seekers to social protection
is dependent on national law and regional law instruments. In principle, the host state bears
the primary responsibility to provide these rights. However, in practice, social protection
provisions tend to be exclusive to citizens and residents of a particular state, and often exclude
non-citizens (Weissbrodt 2008). This type of exclusion from national provisions is manifested
in most LICs and MICs, whereas in high-income countries, despite the different ways refugees
and asylum seekers are officially included in social protection provisions, exclusion could
be a result of multiple considerations including discriminatory practices, political economy
as well as limited resources. Hence, the international community and its influence becomes
a major party in assisting host states and/or taking over part of their responsibility in providing
for refugees.

23.3

POSITIONING REFUGEES IN THE DISCOURSE ON SOCIAL
PROTECTION

Before exploring how refugees can be integrated into social protection systems, it is useful to
examine how they are included in the discourse on social protection in general. Alongside the
humanitarian obligation of meeting the human rights and immediate basic needs of refugees,
a key premise of the SDGs leaving no one behind is found in activating people’s agency as
economic actors. This can arguably be achieved by adopting a transformative social protection
approach, to move from a humanitarian aid position into the potential of human development,
while incorporating protective, preventive and promotive elements of social protection (see
Chapter 1).
Tapping into the refugees’ agency as economic actors and supporting their capacity (see
also the Global Compact on Refugees (UN General Assembly 2018)) requires further examination of the right to work. While recognising that the ability to engage in formal work is
essential to be able to contribute to and benefit from national social insurance schemes, this
right is often curtailed (Zetter and Ruaudel 2016). Article 2(3) of the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights allows LICs and MICs to curtail the right to work
of non-nationals depending on the strength of the national economy. While in developed
countries, refugees should enjoy the same opportunity to work as nationals under Article 17
of the 1951 Convention, some limitations can still be put in place. According to the Reception
Conditions Directive of the European Union (EU), asylum seekers should be granted equal
access to the labour market no later than nine months after they have started the asylum procedure in the destination country unless they themselves are responsible for the delay (Poptcheva
and Stuchlik 2015).
In practice, refugees in LICs and MICs continue to face limited access to labour markets as
well as encampment policies (Jacobsen 2002, 2014; Long and Sabates-Wheeler 2017), which
in turns increases their vulnerability and results in the so-called dependency on aid. This,
together with an increased competition on the (in)formal labour market and increased rent and
food prices, contributes to increased tensions within host communities (e.g. Lakhani 2013;
Turner 2015). By extending the coverage of national social protection programmes to refugees, part of the stigmatisation from the perspective of the host community can be addressed.
Refugees would no longer sit aside as recipients of aid from various agencies as they are

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Refugees and social protection 415
incorporated under the national programme similar to the host community. Furthermore, if
engaging in a transformative approach, issues pertaining to social exclusion and social equity
can be addressed (Loewe et al. 2020 for the case of Jordan).

23.4

INTEGRATING REFUGEES INTO EXISTING SOCIAL
PROTECTION SYSTEMS

The international legal framework makes governments of host countries responsible for the
provision of social protection to refugees but the extent to which they are able to include refugees depends on the social protection systems in place. The different social protection contexts
in the host country tend to leverage the pathways forward (Long and Sabates-Wheeler 2017;
Seyfert et al. 2019). From a transformative social protection perspective, the ideal social protection system for refugees would be highly shock-responsive and targeted at vulnerabilities
during different stages of the life cycle. This type of system would comprise flexible social
protection, active labour market policy, skills provision, social inclusion and integration.
States with strong social protection systems may prefer including refugees over developing
parallel programmes or shadow alignment (Long and Sabates-Wheeler 2017). Presently, the
majority of refugees who find themselves in neighbouring host countries are located in LICs
and MICs. These countries tend to have fragmented or nascent social protection systems,
which are mainly aimed at helping households to cope with risks and providing shelter, cash
transfers and food aid.
As further explained below, the potential for building upon existing state-led social protection programmes for refugees stems from two aspects. First, the fact that many social protection programmes in the European context are under increasing strain and face the maturity of
their schemes. Second, the different SRSP mechanisms that may be utilised to set up social
protection systems for refugees if the host country’s social protection systems lack inclusivity,
as for example in LICs and MICs. In such cases, the role of international actors should be
considered from a pathway perspective.
23.4.1

The European Context

Within the EU, the extent to which refugees and asylum seekers have access to social protection services is largely shaped by national and European law. The majority of European
countries have ratified fully or at least partially the European Social Charter from 1996 – 33
countries in total (see also European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights and European
Court of Human Rights 2015). The extent to which the national law covers also non-citizens
depends partly on the strength of the citizenship paradigm7 in place (Kidd 2017) as well as the
comprehensiveness and type of the respective welfare regime.
To understand which social protection tools are accessible within the various European
countries, it is crucial to differentiate between asylum seekers and refugees. Refugees should
be largely treated as equal to citizens. If there is any exclusion of refugees in accessing certain
A citizenship paradigm is characterised by three components. First, it sees social protection as
a redistribution of the public good. Second, it takes an inclusive, life-cycle approach to social protection.
And third, it places citizens or those legally resident in the country as right holders (see also Kidd 2017).
7

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

416

Handbook on social protection systems

rights, the justification for this therefore needs to be done vigilantly to avoid an issue of
discrimination on grounds of nationality under EU law. An asylum seeker, on the other hand,
is not necessarily eligible to social protection other than the material conditions defined by
Article 17 of the Receptions Conditions Directive.8 This may be in the form of in-kind cash.
If in the form of financial allowance, the concrete amount is determined by the respective
member state. The comparative case study by Poptcheva and Stuchlik (2015) underlines this as
in the various countries, asylum seekers may receive a monthly or daily amount that may differ
between whether someone resides in a reception centre or not (cf. Bulgaria where someone
outside a reception centre is no longer eligible for cash assistance versus Germany where
asylum seekers both in and outside reception centres are eligible for subsistence allowance
albeit different amounts). Refugees, on the other hand, are entitled by Article 29 of the revised
Qualification Directive, as well as Article 11(1)(d) of the Long Term Residents Directive,
to social assistance that is similar to the one given to nationals (European Union Agency for
Fundamental Rights and European Court of Human Rights 2015; Poptcheva and Stuchlik
2015).
Overall, the responsibility for the provision of social protection within the EU largely falls
to the state. The comparative case study on seven different EU member states9 highlights how
the state’s welfare regime in place (including its corresponding laws) greatly influences access
for refugees and asylum seekers with differing coverages depending on the country context
(see Poptcheva and Stuchlik 2015). While most states within Europe have sought to include
refugees and asylum seekers in social protection systems to some extent, exceptions prevail.
One exception is Greece, where refugees and asylum seekers have only limited access to social
assistance, although this is arguably not in line with the legal provisions of the EU and results
from the limited capacity of the national social protection system (Sitaropoulos 2002).
In the case of Greece, the role for non-state actors becomes important in realising a decent
level of well-being for refugees and, thus, is more similar to the situation in LICs and MICs, as
the next section seeks to set out. Cash assistance to refugees is provided through international
agencies, such as the UNHCR. The Greece Cash Alliance, for example, aims at covering the
costs of basic food, transport, communication, school materials and medicine, clothing and
hygiene products. Its objective is to prevent asylum seekers from unsustainable coping strategies such as child labour. Moreover, it seeks to integrate refugees into local communities by
providing them with cash instead of in-kind support that allows them to spend it on the local
markets (UNHCR 2017) with positive effects on local economic development (Loewe et al.
2020). Eligibility for the cash transfer is conditional upon having the necessary registration
documents, being unemployed as well as living in designated areas (UNHCR 2017). However,
this faces the challenge that if someone is settled outside the designated areas that person is not
eligible. Thus, the way the programme is shaped risks excluding certain groups, which would
be amongst the most vulnerable.

8
The Qualification Directive (2011), Asylum Procedure Directive (2013), Reception Conditions
Directive (2013), Dublin III regulation (2013) and EURODAC Regulation (2013) are all part of the
Common European Asylum System that sought to equalise the treatment of asylum seekers among EU
member states (Poptcheva and Stuchlik 2015).
9
The study was conducted on Bulgaria, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain and
Sweden.

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Refugees and social protection 417
23.4.2

Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries and the Role of Shock-Responsive
Social Protection

The previous section highlighted the extent of the social protection coverage for refugees
depending both on the legal framework and social protection system in place. In LICs and
MICs, the extent to which refugees and asylum seekers are included in national social protection systems is even more complex. South Africa is one of the few cases where refugees are
legally entitled to some social protection benefits generated by the programmes that are meant,
first of all, to cover nationals. However, this right for refugees is largely on paper because, in
practice, few government social workers know about it and, hence, often refuse the provision
of due services to non-nationals (Makhema 2009; see Case Study G).
This country example aside, in most countries limited efforts have been explicitly made
to include refugees in national social protection programmes. In these cases, provision by or
collaboration with other actors may be preferred as countries may be reluctant to either take on
the financial burden of including non-nationals particularly with an eye on the open-endedness
of a conflict, or to avoid pressure on already weak social contract structures (see also Jawad et
al. 2018; Seyfert et al. 2019). UNHCR, other intergovernmental organisations, development
agencies and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) may assist the government in providing
assistance. As a result, there is a tendency to rely on short-term programming with limited
funding (see also Makhema 2009; Long and Sabates-Wheeler 2017). Humanitarian aid has
moved more and more towards cash-based interventions (Cash Learning Partnership 2018;
UNHCR 2016). This not only allows for integration in the local markets and provides refugees
with an element of choice, but moreover may indirectly affect psychological well-being and
contribute to social cohesion, as other case studies indicate (Hagen-Zanker et al. 2017; Loewe
et al. 2020; Valli et al. 2019). It additionally has the potential to allow for ease of integrating
the cash transfer systems into regular social protection in the longer term.
Taking a durable perspective, the current academic debate centres around bridging the
humanitarian–development nexus. In case of social protection, this tends to focus on the alignment between humanitarian programming and national social protection systems (cf. Gentilini
et al. 2018; Nimeh et al. 2020; Ulrichs and Sabates-Wheeler 2018). SRSP mechanisms such
as piggy backing, horizontal expansion or shadow alignment10 are seen as a pathway forward
(see Chapter 16; Oxford Policy Management 2015; O’Brien et al. 2018). Their advantage is
that these mechanisms allow for more flexibility in response to the effects of crises on people’s
well-being, and potentially avoid duplication of efforts (Long and Sabates-Wheeler 2017;
O’Brien et al. 2018; Ulrichs and Sabates-Wheeler 2018). And while the social protection programme put in place for refugees may combine components from various SRSP mechanisms
rather than preferring one model over another, as Ulrichs and Sabates-Wheeler phrased it:
‘[the] question is … not necessarily how to move from short- to long-term support, but rather
how to put in place sustainable structures and systems that can deliver both depending on the
needs’ (2018, 16).

Piggy backing is a programming response that uses parts of the existing system while providing
a new programme. Horizontal expansion occurs when new beneficiaries are included in existing systems
for a limited period of time. Shadow alignment is the development of a parallel system that is aligned to
existing or future social protection systems. For a typology overview of the different shock-responsive
mechanisms, we refer to table 4 in O’Brien et al. (2018, 40–1).
10

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

418

Handbook on social protection systems

For example, Turkey’s Emergency Social Safety Net Programme (ESSN), which was
launched in 2016, is a multi-purpose cash assistance scheme for 1.4 million refugees and
asylum seekers that enables people from both groups to meet their basic needs. Also, the
Conditional Cash Transfer for Education (CCTE) scheme directed towards Afghan and Syrian
refugees was launched in 2017 enabling Afghan and Syrian children to have access to public
schooling (International Labour Office and UNICEF 2019; Smith 2017). This scheme is an
extension of the national CCTE for Turkish citizens by the Ministry of Family and Social
Policies and is able to build on the existing national programme’s rules and implementation
structures (Smith 2017; Capacity4DEV 2017). As such, the CCTE programme can be seen as
both a horizontal expansion as well as piggy backing on the national system. The Emergency
Social Safety Net Programme, however, would be part of a parallel system that is run by
non-governmental actors – the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, the Turkish Red Crescent Society – in collaboration with Turkish government
institutions.
23.4.3

International Responsibility When the Provision by the State Is Lacking

While ideally from an integration perspective state-led social protection may be preferred, this
is not always the optimal approach. Delivering assistance through a state-led social protection programme may not only jeopardise the four main humanitarian principles – humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence (Ulrichs and Sabates-Wheeler 2018) – but also may
not fulfil the humanitarian basic needs requirements. Budget constraints and social tensions
within the host community may result in governments refraining from including refugees in
the national system. Further, refugees may feel unable to raise complaints and appeals with
government authorities, thus excluding them more from society (Seyfert et al. 2019).
Recognising that different actors may be involved in the process of delivering social protection services to refugees in countries where the state is not the main provider, a closer examination is required of their interaction. As can be observed in Table 23.2 (for definitions please
refer to Chapter 16), within each mechanism under the SRSP different actors may be involved
in each stage of implementation. The strength of the system determines to what extent a social
protection programme can fully develop and to what extent changes in national regulations
and legislation may be required (Seyfert et al. 2019). This may depend on the administrative
capacity and enabling environment in place (see for example Ovadiya et al. 2015).
While piggy backing would come closer to a state-led social protection programme as it
utilises the national system, shadow alignment may be seen as a more beneficial mechanism to
host government and NGOs in countries with a less mature social protection system. Shadow
alignment like piggy backing is a standalone response; yet, it is aligned to existing or future
programmes in place. It could be a stepping stone from humanitarian programming in the short
term to more long-term sustainable integration into national-led programming (as also argued
by Nimeh et al. 2020 and Seyfert et al. 2019). The better prepared development partners are
prior to the outbreak of a crisis in terms of understanding the social protection systems in
place, the more likely a government can utilise these mechanisms to adapt in times of crisis
(Smith 2017; Nimeh et al. 2020).
By utilising existing administrative systems and processes in place and by strengthening
national systems, a longer-term perspective may be achieved. The challenge remains how
to set up parallel systems in a way that is to the benefit of both refugees and host commu-

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Refugees and social protection 419
Table 23.2

Main actors responsible for each paragraph

Delivery approaches

Shadow alignment

Piggy backing

Financing

Donors

Donors and in-kind contribution Government or donors

National-led systems

Legal and policy framework

NGOs and donors

Line ministries and UN

Line ministries

Setting eligibility criteria and

NGOs, in coordination with

Line ministries and

Line ministries

from government

qualifying conditions

donors

implementers

Setting transfer type, level,

Implementing agencies

Line ministries and

frequency, duration

Line ministries

implementers

Governance and coordination

Steering committee (UN, NGOs Steering committee (UN, NGOs Line ministries, potentially

Outreach

NGOs

and government line ministries) and government line ministries) senior cabinet
Government or humanitarian

Line ministries and regional

actors

social protection offices

Registration

NGOs or UNHCR

National staff

Regional social protection

Enrolment

NGOs, sometimes UN

Government agencies

Government agencies

Payment

Various third-party financial

Payment provider of the

Government financial provider

providers or the payment

government, with UN/NGO

offices

provider of the government

support

Case management

NGOs or UN

National mechanisms, with UN/ National mechanisms

Complaints and appeals

NGOS

National mechanisms, with UN/ National mechanisms

Protection

NGOs, sometimes UN

National social care services

National social care services

Vulnerability assessment

NGOs, sometimes UN

NGO hired by donors

Government-led

NGOs, sometimes UN

Government data systems and

Government data systems and

capacity

capacity

NGO support
NGO support

measurement and
monitoring and evaluation
Information management

Source: Authors’ own based on Seyfert et al. (2019).

nities. Programmes directed at refugees may benefit from national-led structures, whereas
programmes aimed at citizens of the host country may benefit from measures by international
actors put in place for refugees.
The case of Lebanon demonstrates nicely this interaction between programmes directed at
refugees and social protection systems put in place for citizens. Multiple programmes were
put in place to address the influx and impact of Syrian refugees. Simultaneously, UNICEF,
the World Food Programme and the government of Lebanon initiated No Lost Generation, or
Min Ila, in Lebanon. Cash assistance is conditional upon a Syrian child going to the afternoon
shift at public primary schools. This led to an increase in attendance as families did not necessarily face foregone earnings as a result of a child attending school and not working. Thus,
it limited negative coping strategies. Nonetheless, the success of the programme is dependent
on supply-side capacity as constraints may limit the scope of impact on enrolment of Syrian
refugees (de Hoop et al. 2019).
At the same time, to address some of the tensions that arose between the host communities
and refugees, the government of Lebanon, supported by the World Bank, temporarily scaled
up the National Poverty Targeting Project in 2014. The scale up utilised the World Food
Programme e-card food voucher system that had been put in place for the Syrians. The cash

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

420

Handbook on social protection systems

transfer was targeted at those households affected by the Syrian refugees (Gentilini et al.
2018).
Collaboration and partnership between various actors is thus key in developing the trajectory towards development-oriented programming that is aimed at contributing to a sustainable
future for both refugees and host communities. The long-term perspective should be aimed at
prevention and transformation.

23.5

CONCLUDING STATEMENT

On an international level, two debates tend to prevail when it comes to the refugee as recipient
of aid. First, the move towards self-reliance of refugees as the solution to aid dependency.
Second, there is an increased debate on incorporating social protection mechanisms to derive
a sustainable solution to overcome dependency on short-term humanitarian programming.
These elements cannot be seen as separate from each other from a transformative social protection approach. Even though the right to work should be supported, this should be critically
assessed alongside the right to social protection, including social insurance. The interlinkages
between state-led social protection systems and those developed by international actors should
therefore be explored in the move to include refugees in social protection.
To conclude, the access for refugees to social protection varies dependent on the respective
national legal framework, the existing social protection system, and subject to the national
context and the ability to incorporate SRSP mechanisms within social protection programming. While under international law a large share of responsibility falls to host state actors,
too often many international agencies such as the World Food Programme and UNHCR are
needed to assist the host state in addressing the vulnerabilities that refugees face. The mechanism of shadow alignment may provide a tool that could benefit both refugees and national
social protection programming. Only once this has been achieved can the goal to provide
social protection for all by 2030 as set out under SDG 1 be accomplished.

REFERENCES
Brück, T., J. Cuesta, H. De Hoop, U. Gentilini and A. Peterman (2019). Social protection in contexts of
fragility and forced displacement: Introduction to a special issue. Journal of Development Studies 55
(1), 1–6.
Capacity4DEV (2017). Expanding Turkey’s social protection systems to refugees. Europa Aid. https://​
europa​.eu/​capacity4dev/​articles/​expanding​-turkeys​-social​-protection​-systems​-refugees
Cash Learning Partnership (2018). The state of world’s cash report: Cash transfer programming in
humanitarian aid. www​.cashlearning​.org/​downloads/​calp​-sowc​-report​-web​.pdf
Christensen, A. and N. Harild (2009). Forced Displacement – The Development Challenge: Conflict,
Crime and Violence Issue Note. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (2008). General Comment No. 19: The right to
social protection (art. 9).
de Hoop, J., M. Morey and D. Seidenfeld (2019). No lost generation: Supporting the school participation
of displaced Syrian children in Lebanon. Journal of Development Studies 55 (1), 107–27.
DeVictor, X. (2019). 2019 update: How long do refugees stay in exile? To find out, beware of averages.
World Bank Blogs. https://​blogs​.worldbank​.org/​dev4peace/​2019​-update​-how​-long​-do​-refugees​-stay​
-exile​-find​-out​-beware​-averages

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

Refugees and social protection 421
Doocy, S. and H. Tappis (2016). Cash-based approaches in humanitarian emergencies: A systematic
review. 3ie Systematic Review Report 28.
European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights and European Court of Human Rights (2015).
Handbook on European Law Relating to Asylum, Borders and Immigration. Brussels, 1–278.
ExCom (2004). Protracted refugee situations. UNHCR. www​.unhcr​.org/​40c982172​.pdf
Gentilini, U., S. Laughton and C. O’Brien (2018). Human(itarian) capital? Lessons on better connecting
humanitarian assistance and social protection. Social Protection and Jobs Discussion Paper 1802, 1–56.
Hagen-Zanker, J., M. Ulrichs and R. Holmes (2017). Cash Transfers for Refugees: The Economic
and Social Effects of a Programme in Jordan. London: Overseas Development Institute and Aya
Consultancy.
International Labour Office and UNICEF (2019). Towards Universal Social Protection for Children:
Achieving SDG 1.3. New York and Geneva: UNICEF and ILO.
Jacobsen, K. (2002). Livelihoods in conflict: The pursuit of livelihoods by refugees and the impact on the
human security of host communities. International Migration 40 (5), 95–123.
Jacobsen, K. (2014). Livelihoods and forced migration. In E. Fiddian-Qasmiyeh, G. Loescher, K. Long
and N. Sigona (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Refugee and Forced Migration Studies. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 100–12.
Jawad, R., N. Aboushady, H. Mansour, A. Coutts, N.B. Cheikh and S. Lupieri (2018). New directions
in social policy in the MENA region: Country cluster study of Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Oman and
Tunisia. Geneva: UNRISD.
Kidd, S. (2017). Citizenship or charity: The two paradigms of social protection. Pathways Perspectives
on Social Policy in International Development 25, 1–11.
Lakhani, S. (2013). Forced displacement: Moving from managing risk to facilitating opportunity.
Background Note, World Bank. www​.openknowledge​.worldbank​.org/​handle/​10986/​16371
Loewe, M., T. Zintl, J. Fritzenkötter, V. Gantner, R. Kaltenbach and L. Pohl (2020). Community Effects
of Cash-for-Work Programmes in Jordan: Supporting Social Cohesion, More Equitable Gender Roles
and Local Economic Development in Contexts of Flight and Migration. Bonn: German Development
Institute.
Long, K. and R. Sabates-Wheeler (2017). Migration, forced displacement and social protection. GSDRC
Rapid Literature Review. Birmingham: University of Birmingham.
Makhema, M. (2009). Social protection for refugees and asylum seekers in the Southern Africa
Development Community (SADC). Social Protection Discussion Papers 906, 1–50.
Merheb, N. and S. Loughna (eds) (2006). The State of the World's Refugees, 2006: Human Displacement
in the New Millennium. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Newland, K. (2015). Rethinking Global Protection. Washington DC: Migration Policy Institute.
Nimeh, Z.S., T. Kool, F. Iacoella and A. Huns (2020). Rethinking humanitarian aid: Making the case for
humanitarian social protection. UNU-MERIT Working Paper No. 2020-053.
O’Brien, C., Z. Scott, G. Smith et al. (2018). Shock-responsive social protection systems research.
Synthesis Report. Oxford: Oxford Policy Management.
Ovadiya, M., A. Kryeziu, S. Masood and E. Zapatero (2015). Social protection in fragile and conflict-affected
countries: Trends and challenges. Social Protection Labour Discussion Paper 1502, 1–58.
Oxford Policy Management (2015). Shock-responsive social protection systems research. Oxford. www​
.opml​.co​.uk/​files/​Publications/​a0408​-shock​-responsive​-social​-protection​-systems/​wp1​-srsp​-concept​
-note​.pdf​?noredirect​=​1
Poptcheva, E.-M. and A. Stuchlik (2015). Work and Social Welfare for Asylum-Seekers and Refugees.
Brussels: Members’ Research Office.
Puerto Gomez, M. and A. Christensen (2010). The impacts of refugees on neighboring countries: A development challenge. World Development Report: Conflict, Security and Development. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Sepúlveda, M. and C. Nyst (2012). The Human Rights Approach to Social Protection. Helsinki: Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Finland.
Seyfert, K., V. Barca, U. Gentilini, M. Luthria and S. Abbady (2019). Unbundled: A framework for
connecting safety nets and humanitarian assistance in refugee settings. Social Protection and Jobs
Discussion Papers, 1935. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

422

Handbook on social protection systems

Sitaropoulos, N. (2002). Refugee welfare in Greece: Towards a remodelling of the responsibility-shifting
paradigm? Critical Social Policy 22 (3), 436–55.
Smith, G. (2017). Linking cash transfer programming with national social protection systems in humanitarian settings. Social Protection after the Arab Spring, Special Issue of Policy in Focus, 14 (3), 48–50.
Social Protection Inter-Agency Coordination Board (2016). Leaving no one behind: How linking social
protection and humanitarian action can bridge the development–humanitarian divide. http://​pubdocs​
.worldbank​.org/​en/​436341463577765630/​SPIACBstatementWHS​.pdf
Turner, L. (2015). Explaining the (non-)encampment of Syrian refugees: Security, class and the labour
market in Lebanon and Jordan. Mediterranean Politics 20 (3), 386–404.
Ulrichs, M. and R. Sabates-Wheeler (2018). Social protection and humanitarian response: What is the
scope for integration? IDS Working Paper 516, 1–24.
UN General Assembly (1985). Declaration on the human rights of individuals who are not nationals of
the country in which they live. UNGA Resolution 40/144 of 13 December 1985. www​.ohchr​.org/​EN/​
P​rofessiona​lInterest/​Pages/​Huma​nRightsOfI​ndividuals​.aspx
UN General Assembly (2018). Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Part II:
Global compact on refugees. New York: United Nations.
UNHCR (1951). The refugee convention, 1951.
UNHCR (1967). Protocol relating to the status of refugees.
UNHCR (1969). OAU convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa.
UNHCR (1984). Cartagena declaration on refugees.
UNHCR (2015a). States parties to the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees and the 1967
protocol. http://​pubdocs​.worldbank​.org/​en/​4363414635777656
UNHCR (2015b). Guidelines to international protection No. 11: Prima facie recognition of refugee
status. www​.unhcr​.org/​publications/​legal/​558a62299/​guidelines​-international​-protection​-11​-prima​
-facie​-recognition​-refugee​.html
UNHCR (2016). UNHCR strategy for the institutionalisation of cash-based interventions 2016–2020.
www​.unhcr​.org/​protection/​operations/​584131cd7/​unhcr​-strategy​-​institutio​nalisation​-cash​-based​
-interventions​-2016​-2020​.html
UNHCR (2017). The Greece Cash Alliance: Meeting basic needs through a harmonized partnership
system for cash assistance. Geneva: UNHCR. www​.unhcr​.org/​5a14306a7​.pdf
UNHCR (2019). Global Trends at a Glance. Forced Displacement in 2018. Geneva: UNHCR.
UNRWA (2010). UNRWA consolidated eligibility and registration instructions. Department of Relief
and Social Services, June 2006 (excerpts). Refugee Survey Quarterly 28 (2–3), 650–5.
Valli, E., A. Peterman and M. Hidrobo (2019). Economic transfers and social cohesion in a refugee-hosting
setting. Journal of Development Studies 55 (1), 128–46.
Weissbrodt, D. (2008). The Human Rights of Non-Citizens. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zetter, R. and H. Ruaudel (2016). Refugees’ right to work and access to labor markets: An assessment.
KNOMAD Working Paper and Study Series.

Tamara A. Kool and Zina Nimeh - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 11/11/2021 01:34:08AM
via William and Mary School of Law

