2.

Social transfers
Esther Schüring

2.1

INTRODUCTION

Social transfers are on the rise in the Global South but they have also been in the centre of
discussion in the Global North as an attractive instrument to buffer new risks and uncertainties
in a changing world. They have experienced a dramatic change since the beginning of the
new century, starting off as a revolutionary programmatic intervention in countries such as
Mexico and Brazil or as a fledgling pilot programme in countries such as Zambia, Kenya and
Malawi. They have now become a standard intervention across the globe, a truly global social
policy as Hickey and Seekings (2019, 249) coined it. This global trend has been facilitated by
donors’ strive to move away from ever recurring humanitarian actions, by increased pressure
on donors to show aid effectiveness with the money finally reaching the most vulnerable as
well as by international concerted actions such as the United Nations initiative of a global
social protection floor. The policy refocus through the Millennium Development Goals
and Sustainable Development Goals initiatives to fight the multiple dimensions of poverty,
a growing realization that extreme poverty was not simply being eradicated through economic
growth and the occurrence of pandemics such as HIV/AIDS, economic crises and increasing
disaster shocks, equally propelled change.
Whereas social transfers are often the first institutionalized layer of protection for the majority of the population in many low- and middle-income countries, social transfers in terms of
family support and rights-based social assistance were only integrated into the Western welfare
state after World War II (Leisering 2019, 68), once statutory coverage of health, old age and
accidents for the workforce had been guaranteed. Social transfers in the form of social assistance were initially seen as a transitory component in many Western welfare states, one that
would vanish with a more stable economy and people being in employment. Up to this point,
even the more mature welfare states have come to notice that social assistance has not obviated
itself, even though it has been subject to different reforms over time, in particular in reaction
to shocks such as the financial crisis in 2008 (ILO 2017). The COVID-19 crisis will also leave
important footprints in this regard. Social transfer schemes in the West have generally become
more selective and punitive over time, turning universal programmes into means-tested
support and tying minimum income benefits to stricter conditions. Another reform option that
countries worldwide have discussed though more recently is a universal basic income grant,
a transfer without any strings attached (see Case Study B). Different reform scenarios have
been tested but political commitment towards a national roll-out has been scant.
While social transfers have been (re)discovered and increasingly proven by evidence as
a suitable social protection instrument in contexts marked by informality and/or non-standard
labour market relations, there is a need for greater clarity when it comes to the core functions
of social transfers, their place in the overall social protection systems, the critical design
parameters and ways to sustain social transfers over time. This chapter therefore starts off by
presenting a conceptual framework for social transfers that highlights the various functions
40
Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

Social transfers

41

and forms that social transfers can assume. It continues by placing social transfers into the
overall social protection system and reviewing whether social transfers are an integral or subsidiary instrument. This is followed by a discussion of the different design parameters as well
as the evidence base on social transfers, which is meant to guide policy decisions. The chapter
concludes by reflecting critically on what it takes to sustain social transfers in the future.

2.2

CONCEPT

Social transfers encompass a wide array of transfers with different functions and features,
almost too wide to do justice to in a single chapter (see Chapter 1, Figure 1.4). A common
definition is that social transfers are regular, reliable, state-provided, non-contributory transfers whose main function is to prevent poverty and help mitigate vulnerable phases in life. It
is widely accepted that social transfers are paid irrespective of someone’s employment and
contribution history and that they are not provided as a charitable hand-out but as a binding
and reliable transfer by the state. Controversies arise, however, when it comes to the main
function, the duration of benefits and the scope of interventions covered. Those features are
now discussed in greater detail and a categorization of tax-financed transfers is attempted.
2.2.1

Main Function

Social transfers are often synonymously used for social assistance and social safety nets,
which in other handbooks on social policy represent the other main component of a social protection system next to social insurance. It is therefore not surprising to find in most definitions
(Frazer and Marlier 2016, 5–6; Midgley 2019, 352; UNDP 2019, 53) a clear focus on poverty
and on providing means-tested assistance. Social transfers in this definition are deliberately
selective and not universal in nature. Other definitions (UNDP 2019, 26; World Bank 2018)
allow for a broader definition of social transfers aiming to help people in vulnerable phases
of their life, irrespective of their capacity to handle this risk, such as social pensions or child
grants that are not means tested.
Social transfers differ in those definitions with respect to their main function and, with it, in
their normative basis for providing the transfer and in the principles for targeting and paying
benefits. It is therefore important to clearly distinguish between different types of social transfers (Table 2.1).
Tax-financed transfers can be broadly categorized into three different models:
1. ‘Universal’ programmes are available to all citizens such as a universal health service,
a universal basic income grant or ‘quasi-universal’ programmes which are available to
all members of a group regardless of their financial means. Transfers are provided on the
basis of citizenship and the transfer, which is uniform, mainly serves an insurance function.
Citizens know that when confronted with the typical life-cycle risks such as having a child
or being elderly, they have better means of managing.
2. Social assistance is available to those in society who lack the necessary means to cope.
Transfers are provided on the basis of need with the aim to reduce poverty and ensure that
every citizen in society receives a socially defined minimum. What this minimum entails
differs across societies. Some mainly consider the necessary means to survive whereas

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

42

Handbook on social protection systems

others pursue a more multi-dimensional concept of poverty that also factors in access to
education, health and critical social services. Even more ambitious are those who expect
that the transfer should be economically empowering and transformative so that the
minimum is not undercut in the future (see Chapter 14).
3. Allowances offer compensation for victims of war for instance or additional benefits to the
public sector. This is not usually a category which is prioritized in low- and middle-income
countries but it has played a role in the reintegration of ex-combatants in Congo or, more
recently, when it comes to compensating civil servants for COVID-19-related duties in the
Philippines (Gentilini et al. 2020). It is paid on the basis of merit to reward efforts for the
general public. Either a pre-fixed minimum or a benefit equivalent to previous income is
paid out.
Table 2.1

Categorization of tax-financed social transfers

Models of tax-financed

‘Universal’ programmes

Social assistance

Allowances

transfers
Child benefit, social pension,

Examples

Means-tested benefits

national health service

Function

Insurance

Poverty

Compensation for war victims,
benefits for the public sector
Public reward

Targeting principle

Categorical/universal

Selective

Categorical

Normative basis

Citizenship

Need

Merit

Benefit rate

Uniform

Individualized, minimum

Equivalence or minimum

Benefit type

Income supplements

Measures to lower the price for goods
and services

Cash transfers

In-kind

Near cash:

Price

transfers

vouchers/

subsidies

Public works
Conditionality of
support
Benefit scope

Unconditional

Conditional

General subsistence

coupons

Indirectly conditioned

Tied benefits

General allowance for living
expenses
Cash plus

Fee waivers Free access

Housing allowance, health insurance, legal aid, educational support

Combined benefits, tailored to the needs of the benefit recipient

Source: Author’s own.

2.2.2

Duration of Benefits

While the definition spells out that transfers should be regular, there is little agreement as
to how regular they ought to be, at least for social assistance programmes. It is therefore
contested as to whether social transfers should be paid out for a ‘pre-specified period of time’
(Barrientos 2019b, 385) or for an unspecified period and whether only long(er)-term assistance
or equally short-term assistance qualifies. Practices vary around the world, depending again
on the underlying logic of the social transfer scheme. Most Latin American programmes
started off with a specific timeframe as they were set up as a response to crisis management
and not for structural poverty (Barrientos and Villa 2016, 424). Other schemes like Temporary

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

Social transfers

43

Assistance for Needy Families in the United States are limited in order to send out a clear
message that people need to resume responsibility for their life at the earliest point possible.
A needs-centred approach of social assistance ties the duration of support to the actual need.
This can be short or long term and could be a response to a regular life-cycle risk but also to
an emergency that arises. Regular implies that there is an in-built response mechanism that
lasts as long as support is required. Any predetermined end could therefore be seen in a critical
light.
2.2.3

Scope of Interventions Covered

There is disagreement as to which benefit types are covered. Typically social transfers comprise income supplements as well as measures to lower the price for goods and services (see
Table 2.1). Income can be supplemented through cash transfers, in-kind transfers such as
school feeding and asset transfers as well as through near-cash transfers such as vouchers and
coupons which can be exchanged for certain goods. The price for goods and services can be
reduced through price subsidies for selected goods, through fee waivers or even through free
access for certain groups in society. Databases on social transfers use different combinations
of interventions and it is important to be aware of which interventions are included before the
data is analysed. The recent database on social assistance for Africa excludes food emergency
aid and school-feeding programmes, the social assistance database by Manchester University
excludes any type of emergency response and the World Bank status report on safety nets in
Africa (2018, 4) excludes consumer price, energy and food subsidies. The World Bank Atlas
of Social Protection Indicators of Resilience and Equity (ASPIRE; World Bank n.d.) database
on social assistance includes all of these interventions, next to further subsidies, tax exemptions and social services.
Despite these differences in categorization, some common trends are discernible: we can
see a move away from indirect transfers such as universal in-kind subsidies (Jorgensen and
Bennett 2019, 12–13), even if the spending on subsidies still largely exceeds any other social
transfer programme in many countries, in particular in the oil-exporting ones (World Bank
2015, 26). Cash transfers have been on the increase and have over time replaced many in-kind
responses, even in emergency situations (see for instance UNDP 2019, 21). The responses to
the COVID-19 crisis show that cash transfers are the most commonly used instrument to help
people cope with close to 60 per cent of programmes captured delivering cash (Gentilini et al.
2020). In-kind support such as school feeding, however, still forms an important component
of the social transfer portfolio of most countries (see also Chapter 35). Close to 80 per cent of
countries captured in the ASPIRE database had a school-feeding programme running (World
Bank 2018).

2.3

ROLE IN THE OVERALL SOCIAL PROTECTION SYSTEM

In line with the different functions that social transfers can potentially fulfil, social transfers
do not have a pre-fixed position in the social protection system. While allowances do not play
a big role in most low- and middle-income countries, the place of ‘universal’ programmes
and social assistance varies and their overall role in a rights-based universal system can be
controversially debated.

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

44
2.3.1

Handbook on social protection systems
Are Social Transfers First or Second in Line?

In order to do justice to the complexity of this question, we need to distinguish between social
assistance and ‘universal’ programmes. Countries across the world accord different roles
depending on the underlying logic of the social protection system in place (Leisering 2019).
Broadly, four different models can be distinguished.
Social transfers being subsidiary
For some states, social assistance is a mechanism of last resort, with other systems such as
social insurance kicking in first as the dominant social protection mechanism (Germany or
France). Social assistance is however institutionalized and not seen as a placeholder for more
universal transfers, which exist but are not regarded as the first level of social protection.
Universal programmes come first, social assistance second
States focusing on the provision of universal services and transfers and the assumption of
full employment (Scandinavian countries) deprioritize social assistance even if access to it is
guaranteed. Health and care services are universal in nature and not predominantly organized
through social insurance.
Social assistance as the main instrument
Some states rely on social assistance as their main instrument for risk management and poverty
reduction (Australia). Transfers are however not tightly targeted and kept to a minimum,
which is an important difference to the last category.
Social assistance as the only instrument
The last category of states limits the role of government in social protection and restricts
provision of social protection to the poor with social assistance having a residual character
(United States).
Viewing social assistance in isolation and not as part of a broader system when comparing
expenditure, coverage and effects across countries is therefore bound to lead to mistakes.
Unsurprisingly, donors also allocate a different role to social transfers in the Global South,
which is aligned with their own institutional and historical logic (see Chapters 1 and 29).
2.3.2

Is Social Assistance a Legitimate Component of a Rights-Based Social
Protection System?

Some authors have contested that social assistance can translate into an entitlement or
a social right (see for instance Kidd 2017). They critically allude to the discretion that the
welfare administration has over claimants, to the means-test which is often erroneous and to
beneficiaries who are sometimes stigmatized to an extent that they refrain from taking up the
transfer. Leisering and Barrientos (2013, S53–4) argue that a right to social assistance does not
depend on the instrument as such but mainly on how social assistance is designed, institutionalized and contextualized. A society can ensure by law, practice and norms that every citizen
who falls into a situation of need will be supported. Even administrative mistakes that deny
this right can be corrected if accountability mechanisms are in place.

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

Social transfers

45

Many low- and middle-income countries are still far away from granting this right of
citizenship due to inadequate finances, limited legal grounding and weak law enforcement or
complaint resolution mechanisms. But one should not overlook that social transfers are also
a fairly recent policy in many low- and middle-income countries and that progress is being
made with greater efforts towards institutionalization (UNDP 2019, 33).
A rights-based approach mandates the state to provide social transfers that meet the individual needs of a particular person (see Chapter 11). Social transfers and in particular cash plus
programmes which provide multiple benefits and services (see Table 2.1) are without doubt
a much more personalized approach than the social action funds which were propagated by
the World Bank prior to the arrival of social transfers (Jorgensen and Bennett 2019). While
even individual social transfers generate important spill-over effects for the household, more
caution is advised at policy-making level not to brand an individual social transfer such as
a social pension as a poverty reduction transfer for the entire household. This distorts the
objective, the benchmark against which success is measured and might also be a disadvantage
for the individual originally targeted (see Chapter 19).
2.3.3

How Can a Selective Scheme Still Contribute towards Universality?

A selective social assistance scheme might at first sight run counter to efforts towards universal social protection. If granted as a social right that is guaranteed to everyone in poverty,
however, social assistance also offers universal protection to anyone who is poor. Social
assistance is equally an integral measure in every social protection system to guarantee universal protection. While ‘universal’ transfers reach out to every citizen, they don’t necessarily
guarantee that everyone’s needs are met (see Chapter 8). Poverty can be partly prevented
through ‘universal’ programmes but in particular people in poverty require approaches that
are individualized and respond to multiple problems at a time (see Chapter 5). This is difficult
to achieve through uniform transfers and services alone. It is therefore the interplay of programmes that ensures universality.

2.4

DESIGN PARAMETERS

When designing social transfer schemes, the main decisions to be taken are on the target
group, the transfer size and the extent to which the programme is supposed to be conditioned
(for an illustration, see Case Study A). Further important considerations are to design the
transfer programme in an inclusive way and to think through exit strategies.
2.4.1

Target Group

The target groups differ according to the function of the social transfer scheme. As social assistance is means tested, the main target group is people whose income or well-being is below
a defined minimum. This group is often not easily defined or identified. Numbers of social
assistance recipients cannot be as easily projected as with a pension scheme as they depend
on changes in the labour market, in the family constellation as well as in the inclusiveness of
other social protection programmes (Bahle et al. 2010, 449). Another complication of poverty
targeting is of course where to set the minimum and how to measure poverty in a context

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

46

Handbook on social protection systems

where poverty is not only fluid but difficult to capture in precise and comparable numbers (see
Chapter 8 for more details on targeting).
‘Universal’ programmes are either open for all citizens or for all citizens of a particular
group such as the elderly, children, single parents, people with a disability, etc. Even if the
target group for ‘universal’ programmes is more easily defined, the decisions on the detailed
eligibility criteria are not trivial. The choice of cut-off points such as the entry year of pension
receipt or the last year of eligibility for a child grant, the verification procedure for a disability
as well as the type of product and service for which prices are reduced all have implications
on the poverty and inequality effects of the transfer. The better off usually live longer, they
have means to even manoeuvre complicated assessment procedures and they consume
higher-quality products, fuel and tertiary education. Hence, a ‘universal’ scheme with a high
age cut-off, a complicated medical procedure for disability assessment as well as a fuel
subsidy or a fee exemption for tertiary education can have regressive effects (see Chapter 19).
2.4.2

Transfer Size

When defining the optimal transfer size, different considerations matter for policy-makers.
Ideally, the primary objective of the transfer scheme should be the guiding principle. A child
grant should reflect the costs of raising a child, a school-feeding scheme should offer a nutritious meal for every child and a general subsistence grant should cover living costs. The costs
for a subsistence grant could be determined through a basket of goods approach which lists
and quantifies items and services that everybody should have access to. Identified by expert(s),
this choice remains normative. An alternative represents the statistical method of basing
consumption needs on actual expenditure of the bottom income group which is currently not
benefiting. This estimation is less subjective but runs the risk of being the real rather than the
ideal expenditure.
The reality in many countries, even in the European Union, is that the main objective is not
the sole driver behind the calculation of the benefit size (Frazer and Marlier 2016, 17). This
is for instance shown by the fact that social assistance transfers rarely bring recipients up to
the poverty line, which should be the main objective of a poverty-centred intervention. Policy
decisions around the transfer size are also driven by concerns around affordability, disincentives and policy coherence with other social policies, which might motivate policy-makers to
keep the transfer size lower than what the fulfilment of the objective requires.
Affordability is of course not only defined by the transfer amount but jointly determined
by target group and transfer amount. Countries with limited financial resources have pursued
different ways to progressively realize social protection entitlements: countries like Nepal
started with very modest amounts across different societal groups, South Africa and Lesotho
initially limited the budgetary allocation through respective favourable age cut-offs, Zambia’s
child grant started in the worst-off districts (see Case Study A) and countries like Ghana and
Malawi first addressed the destitute. Disincentives play out in two ways: both those who are
eligible as well as ineligible are not supposed to change their behaviour in order to benefit
or continue benefiting from the scheme. Social assistance should for instance not discourage
work, the accumulation of assets or savings.
While amounts for ‘universal’ programmes are often standardized, amounts for social
assistance are individualized, varying with the available resources as well as the specific
needs of the household. A single-person household typically receives less than a family

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

Social transfers

47

whereas a household with multiple deprivations receives different transfers and services than
a household who experiences a temporary income shortage. While the size of the household or
the number of children is more often reflected in the transfer size in low- and middle-income
countries, the individualization at the level of household resources is often not administrable
for the same reasons that a means test proves challenging (Davis and Handa 2015; Ibarrarán
et al. 2017).
The transfer size is also not just determined once but needs to be updated over time. Transfer
adjustments range from complex procedures such as the amount being tagged to the price as
well as to the wage and salary index in Germany to transfers being adjusted according to the
index of national pensions in Finland or the statutory minimum wage in Spain to transfers
being politically renegotiated in Latvia (European Commission n.d.). Low- and middle-income
countries often lack standards for transfer determination and adjustment, hence the amounts
are not inflation-adjusted and risk to lose value over time (Leisering 2019).
A particularly challenging update is how future income from work and assets is considered
in the calculation of the transfer size as this directly concerns recipients’ incentive to take up
work. The take-up of work and the build-up of assets can be incentivized through a flatter taper
rate at which social transfers are withdrawn, the introduction of a disregard for the accumulation of certain assets, the payment of boni when work is resumed again or through factoring
in activity supplements in the means test. However, care must also be taken to treat people
of similarly low income in the same way and to not overly advantage the person on benefits.
2.4.3

Conditionality

Transfers can be conditioned to various degrees, as illustrated by Table 2.1. Some transfers
such as in-kind transfers, vouchers and price reductions are indirectly conditioned in the way
they steer recipients’ consumption choices. Conditional cash transfers (CCTs) are not as
restrictive but they also intend to guide recipients’ consumption, investment and work behaviour. CCTs commonly ask households for regular health check-ups of children, regular school
attendance and participation in training courses in exchange for the transfer. These conditions
are put in place in order to ensure that transfers not only lead to increased consumption but also
investment in health and education though a substitution effect towards societally favourable
goods. Public works programmes are cash or in-kind benefits that are paid out on the condition that the recipients work. Next to optimizing recipients’ behaviour, conditionality is also
supposed to increase the political acceptability of social transfers.
CCTs are more widespread in Latin America than in Asia or Africa, which is at least partly
related to the additional administrative complexities that CCTs introduce. But conditionality is
not only a phenomenon of the Global South. Even European countries have made social assistance conditional over time, requiring for instance job seekers to increase their employability
and modify their job-seeking strategies.
The evidence base shows that this type of nudging is not always necessary and that conditionality often only leads to marginal improvements (Schüring 2012). Better effects can often
only be achieved under for instance stricter monitoring and enforcement (Baird et al. 2014;
Paiva et al. 2016), which many low-income countries struggle with. Consideration should also
be given to potential side effects such as reduced consumption (Heinrich and Knowles 2020),
increased stress levels and a lower likelihood of reducing early marriages and childbearing
activities (Baird et al. 2016) as well as higher administrative costs associated with condition-

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

48

Handbook on social protection systems

ality. Despite this unpersuasive evidence base, the political attractiveness of conditionality
remains unbroken. With the new challenges ahead (see Part VIII), time will tell whether conditionality will be swept away with a new wave of basic income grants in response to automation
and worldwide future crises or whether it actually increases in importance with the focus on
climate-friendly behaviour adjustments.
2.4.4

Inclusive Design

More recently, greater efforts have been made to ensure that differing needs and constraints
of women or people with disability are mainstreamed into social transfer policy design (see
Chapter 18 on gender and Chapter 19 on disability). There is still a long way to go but there
is at least greater recognition that certain behavioural requirements place for instance a higher
burden on women (Molyneux 2006), that women have to master caring obligations and need
child-care facilities, more flexible work hours and less strenuous work during pregnancy and
that the amount, the reliability and even the payment method can trigger different gender
effects (Peterman et al. 2019). Interestingly, simply targeting transfers at women does not
automatically translate into transformative impacts, neither for the women nor for the children.
In a similar way, people with disability also need a more nuanced approach when it comes to
social transfers. Countries might either opt to have a separate disability grant scheme, to deliberately include people with disabilities into existing programmes or have a combination of the
two. In a population-wide scheme, attention should be paid that expenditure and consumption
needs for people with disability are different and hence means tests and benefit amounts have
to be adjusted accordingly. People with disability also have constraints in registering for
transfer schemes, in accessing transfers and services and complying with certain conditions.
2.4.5

Exit Strategy

Whereas universal programmes often have a natural end for support such as the end of childhood or the end of life, social assistance programmes need to define more carefully the end of
poverty and which measures are suitable to empower recipients to eventually master life on
their own (see Chapter 14). This can be done by combining a suitable range of transfers and
services, by setting and adjusting the transfer rate in a conducive way over time, by attaching meaningful conditions and by creating mechanisms that flexibly respond to changes. It
is, however, an extremely challenging task that even for European Union countries has not
proven fully effective and where suboptimal labour market policies, high opportunity costs
for recipients and limited information technology interconnectivity between programmes have
thwarted graduation plans (Frazer and Marlier 2016).
While in many countries graduation programmes are standardized and allow little room for
individualization, support packages eventually have to be tailor-made to be effective: a chronically poor person needs a different type of support than someone who is transiently poor
(Packard et al. 2019, 34–5). In countries where social transfers are still in an initial phase with
transfers not being regular, timely and too far below the minimum, it remains questionable
whether interlinking transfers further and concentrating resources on the lucky few should be
the first priority. This might eventually have a negative effect on social relations (Ansell et
al. 2019, 23) and challenge an already overtaxed administration. Exit strategies therefore still
remain a work in progress (Barrientos 2019a, 378).

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

Social transfers

2.5

49

PERFORMANCE

As stated earlier, social transfers have experienced an unprecedented growth. It is however
important to analyse whether it has been equal for all, in particular those who need support the
greatest, whether the growth is also visible when it comes to adequate transfer amounts and
whether it has been overall effective. This section will therefore focus on the coverage and
adequacy of social transfers, drawing on data from the World Bank’s ASPIRE database, as
well as on impact. The discussion on impact takes a narrower focus on cash transfers as cash
has now turned into the preferred modality.
2.5.1

Coverage

Despite the growth of social transfer schemes and the fact that by 2015 every country in the
world had a social transfer programme in place (Beegle et al. 2018, 4), coverage in terms of
people reached is still largely inadequate. According to the World Social Protection Report
2017–19 (ILO 2017), close to half of the population worldwide doesn’t have recourse to any
social protection scheme. Far more people are reached through social transfer programmes
than through social insurance programmes in most low-income countries but large shares of
the poorest still remain uncovered.
In low-income countries only 16 per cent of people in the poorest quintile receive social
transfers according to data from the ASPIRE database. Coverage increases with the income
status of the country but 42 and 35 per cent of the poorest quintile are still left without assistance in lower- and upper middle-income countries, respectively. Social transfers are often
uncoordinated, the spread is uneven across countries (UNDP 2019, 22) and the financial
resources allocated fall short of the actual demand. Even with perfect targeting, not all poor
households in Africa could for instance benefit (Beegle et al. 2018, 9).
Coverage varies according to the type of social transfer scheme being administered. In
South Asia, for instance, in-kind transfers are most successful with close to 82 per cent of the
poorest 20 per cent being reached, in Latin America CCTs (44 per cent) and in Europe and
Central Asia unconditional cash transfers (27 per cent). Even in Europe coverage greatly varies
according to country context but also target group. Only 12 per cent of those at risk of poverty
are reached by social assistance in Croatia and half of the poorest adults in France (at 40 per
cent of median income) are without minimum income support (Frazer and Marlier 2016, 23).
In Germany, the United Kingdom and Switzerland roughly a third of eligible individuals don’t
take up the benefit due to shame, stigma, inadequate information, too much effort required or
corruption (Frazer and Marlier 2016, 26).
2.5.2

Adequacy of Transfers

Data from ASPIRE shows that transfer sizes are also inadequate and further dampen poverty
reduction effects. South Asia’s successful coverage rate of 88 per cent of the poorest quintile
is undone by the extremely low transfer size to recipients of 0.1 United States dollars daily
per person. This is the average amount for people coming from low-income countries. Upper
middle-income countries pay on average three times more to the poorest quintile, which still
amounts to no more than 10 United States dollars per month. The richest quintile benefits from
social transfers by far more, even 10 times the amount of the poorest quintile in low-income

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

50

Handbook on social protection systems

countries. None of these schemes help on average to bring recipients up to the poverty line. In
Africa, for instance, the average cash transfer makes up 10 per cent of the national poverty line
(Beegle et al. 2018, 9). The inadequacy of benefits is, however, not only a low-income country
phenomenon. Even in most European Union countries, social transfer amounts fall short of the
poverty line: in the weakest schemes, social transfer payments for a single person are only in
the range of 24 and 29 per cent of the ‘at-risk-of-poverty’ line and benefits in the more generous schemes are between 71 and 91 per cent (Frazer and Marlier 2016, 23).
2.5.3

Impact

The evidence based on the effects of cash transfers, impact chains and factors of success has
experienced an unprecedented growth (Niño-Zarazúa 2019), which has not been mirrored by
the Global North (Frazer and Marlier 2016). Next to the largely positive and significant effects
of cash transfers on consumption, nutrition, access to health and education (Bastagli et al.
2019; World Bank 2015), which are illustrated in greater detail in Part VII of the handbook,
the following findings are noteworthy for policy-making:
1. Main impact of social transfers is on the poverty gap rather than the poverty headcount
(World Bank 2018). This even holds true for EU countries (Frazer and Marlier 2016, 26–7)
and is related to the design of the transfer size (Chapter 34).
2. Some of the common concerns around cash transfers fuelling dependency, inflation, fertility and greater expenditure on demerit goods can be refuted (Handa et al. 2018). Even
in contexts with higher transfer amounts, dependency seems overstated (Immervoll et al.
2015).
3. Cash transfers don’t just benefit the individual or household but have significant spill-over
effects. In Ghana every dollar spent on transfers generates 2.5 dollars of nominal income
(World Bank 2015), while the average multiplier effects of the GiveDirectly project in
Kenya is at 2.6 (Egger et al. 2019, 30). So even targeted interventions lead to more universal benefits (Chapter 37).
4. Cash transfers can have productive effects such as an increase in labour supply in desired
work (beyond wage labour) or an increase in livestock and agricultural assets but effects
are heterogeneous, depending on the size, regularity and duration of the transfer, the demographic profile of the household and the constraints and opportunities households face in
local communities (Daidone et al. 2019).
5. The effects of cash transfers are far-reaching with even more subtle effects on dignity and
self-worth (Fisher et al. 2017), reductions in intimate partner violence (Buller et al. 2018),
improved mental health for youth (Angeles et al. 2019) and greater happiness (Natali et al.
2018). Social transfers in isolation are, however, no silver bullet to increase agricultural production, resilience, better coping mechanisms and social transformation at the same time.
Further research needs to shed more light on the factors of success (UNDP 2019), on how
generational as well as political and economic power relations are impacted (Ansell et al.
2019, 4), on cash plus effects as well as on long-term impact. Initial evidence on long-term
impact exists (Molina-Millan et al. 2016; Niño-Zarazúa 2019) but it has not been sufficiently
explored, partly because of methodological challenges or too short differences in exposure
between treatment and control.

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

Social transfers

2.6

51

CONCLUDING REMARKS

Social transfers are an important and very versatile social protection tool which can have different functions for different groups in society. In order to avoid wrongful comparisons across
social transfer schemes and misleading policy recommendations, it is crucial that each and
every scheme is clear about the main objective and components and is also measured accordingly. A social pension is not a household poverty grant and categorical transfers don’t automatically cancel out the need for more targeted interventions to those in poverty. A single-issue
transfer such as school feeding by nature generates different effects than a multi-purpose cash
plus programme. If a cash transfer’s primary purpose is to assist a household in living a decent
standard of life, then it should not be characterized as ineffective if it fails in other dimensions.
For social transfers to do justice to growing expectations, they need to be politically, financially and institutionally sustained. Political support has definitely grown over time but its
future hinges on the place and design of social transfers being in line with social norms and
preferences and people’s understanding of poverty (see Chapter 30). Greater political support
will trickle greater financial sustainability.
It is not trivial, however, to identify the resources required for a social transfer scheme with
decent coverage (see Chapter 7), in particular since this is not the only social policy demand
placed on government. Foreign aid is only a temporary solution and might thwart ownership,
legitimacy and a long-term government commitment to social transfers. A reform of the tax
system and a reallocation of budgets for regressive programmes could be one option (UNDP
2019, 43–6), the curtailment of illicit financial flows another (Beegle et al. 2018, 39), if politically feasible. Contingency funds for emergencies could be considered and the diaspora as
well as companies could potentially also bear a greater responsibility (Beegle et al. 2018, 39).
Financing mechanisms at a global level are also under discussion, which could ensure a more
effective and fair risk pool (see Chapter 12).
Long-term financing strategies would also help with better institutionalization. Looking at
the lack of qualified staff at local level – with no more than three social workers in charge of
100,000 inhabitants in Tanzania, Zambia, Senegal, Ghana and Kenya, for instance (UNDP
2019, 96) – at high turnover in administrative staff as well as corruption, institutionalization
of social transfers remains a big challenge. A social protection policy in place and a growing
commitment of the national government to take over funding will not ensure institutionalization alone.

REFERENCES
Angeles, G., J. de Hoop, S. Handa, K. Kilburn, A. Milazzo and A. Peterman (2019). Government of
Malawi’s unconditional cash transfer improves youth mental health. Social Science and Medicine
225, 108–19.
Ansell, N., L. van Blerk, E. Robson, F. Hajdu, E. Mwathunga, T. Hlabana and R. Hemsteede (2019).
Social cash transfers, generational relations and youth poverty trajectories in rural Lesotho and
Malawi. Brunel University London.
Bahle, T., M. Pfeifer and C. Wendt (2010). Social assistance. In F.G. Castles, S. Leibfried, J. Lewis, H.
Obinger and C. Pierson (eds), The Oxford Handbook of the Welfare State. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 448–61.

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

52

Handbook on social protection systems

Baird, S., F.H.G. Ferreira, B. Özler and M. Woolcock (2014). Conditional, unconditional and everything
in between: A systematic review of the effects of cash transfer programmes on schooling outcomes.
Journal of Development Effectiveness 6 (1), 1–43.
Baird, S., E. Chirwa, J. de Hoop and B. Özler (2016). Girl power: Cash transfers and adolescent welfare:
Evidence from a cluster-randomized experiment in Malawi. In S. Edwards, S. Johnson and D.N. Weil
(eds), African Successes, Volume 2. University of Chicago Press, 139–64.
Barrientos, A. (2019a). Conditional income transfers, social policy and development. In J. Midgley, R.
Surender and L. Alfers (eds), Handbook of Social Policy and Development. Cheltenham, UK and
Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing, 373–92.
Barrientos, A. (2019b). The role of social assistance in reducing poverty and inequality in Asia and the
Pacific. Asian Development Bank.
Barrientos, A. and J.M. Villa (2016). Economic and political inclusion in human development conditional income transfer programmes in Latin America. Social Policy and Society 15 (3), 421–33.
Bastagli, F., J. Hagen-Zanker, L. Harman, V. Barca, G. Sturge and T. Schmidt (2019). The impact of
cash transfers: A review of the evidence from low- and middle-income countries. Journal of Social
Policy 48 (3), 569–94.
Beegle, K., A. Coudouel and E. Monsalve (2018). Realizing the Full Potential of Social Safety Nets in
Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Buller, A.M., A. Peterman, M. Ranganathan, A. Bleile, M. Hidrobo and L. Heise (2018). A mixed-method
review of cash transfers and intimate partner violence in low- and middle-income countries. World
Bank Research Observer 33 (2), 218–58.
Daidone, S., B. Davis, S. Handa and P. Winters (2019). The household and individual‐level productive impacts of cash transfer programs in Sub‐Saharan Africa. American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 101 (5), 1401–31.
Davis, B. and S. Handa (2015). How much do programmes pay? Transfer size in selected national cash
transfer programmes in sub-Saharan Africa. Innocenti Research Brief 2015-01. Florence: UNICEF
Office of Research.
Egger, D., J. Haushofer, E. Miguel, P. Niehaus and M. Walker (2019). General equilibrium effects of
cash transfers: Experimental evidence from Kenya. Unpublished Working Paper.
European Commission (n.d.). Comparative tables: Mutual information system on social protection. www​
.missoc​.org​/​missoc​-​​database/​comparative​-​​tables/​​
Fisher, E., R. Attah, V. Barca, C. O’Brien, S. Brook, J. Holland, A. Kardan, S. Pavanello and P. Pozarny
(2017). The livelihood impacts of cash transfers in Sub-Saharan Africa: Beneficiary perspectives from
six countries. World Development 99, 299–319.
Frazer, H. and E. Marlier (2016). Minimum income schemes in Europe: A study of national policies
2015. Brussels: European Commission.
Gentilini, U., M. Almenfi and I. Orton (2020). Social Protection and Jobs Responses to COVID-19:
A Real-Time Review of Country Measures. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Handa, S., S. Daidone, A. Peterman, B. Davis, A. Pereira, T. Palermo and J. Yablonski (2018).
Myth-busting? Confronting six common perceptions about unconditional cash transfers as a poverty
reduction strategy in Africa. World Bank Research Observer 33 (2), 259–98.
Heinrich, C.J. and M.T. Knowles (2020). A fine predicament: Conditioning, compliance and consequences in a labeled cash transfer program. World Development 129, 104876.
Hickey, S. (2014). Relocating social protection within a radical project of social justice. European
Journal of Development Research 26, 322–37. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejdr.2014.9
Hickey, S. and J. Seekings (2019). Who should get what, how and why: DFID and the transnational
politics of social cash transfers in sub-Saharan Africa. In S. Hickey, T. Lavers, J. Seekings and M.
Niño-Zarazúa (eds), The Politics of Social Protection in Eastern and Southern Africa. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 249–75.
Ibarrarán, P., N. Medellín, F. Regalia and M. Stampini (2017). How conditional cash transfers work:
Good practices after 20 years of implementation. Inter-American Development Bank.
ILO (2017). World social protection report 2017–19: Universal social protection to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. Geneva.

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

Social transfers

53

Immervoll, H., S. Jenkings and S. Königs (2015). Are recipients of social assistance ‘benefit dependent’:
Concepts, measurement and results for selected countries. OECD Social, Employment and Migration
Working Papers No. 162. Paris: OECD.
Jorgensen, S.L. and P. Bennett (2019). Social protection in an era of increasing uncertainty and disruption: Social risk management 2.0. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Kidd, S. (2017). Citizenship or Charity: The Two Paradigms of Social Protection. Orpington:
Development Pathways.
Leisering, L. (2019). The Global Rise of Social Cash Transfers: How States and International
Organizations Constructed a New Instrument for Combating Poverty. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Leisering, L. and A. Barrientos (2013). Social citizenship for the global poor? The worldwide spread of
social assistance. International Journal of Social Welfare 22 (2–3), S50–S67.
Midgley, J. (2019). Social assistance, poverty and development. In J. Midgley, R. Surender and L. Alfers
(eds), Handbook of Social Policy and Development. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA:
Edward Elgar Publishing, 352–72.
Molina-Millan, T., T. Barham, K. Macours, J.A. Maluccio and M. Stampini (2016). Long-term impacts of
conditional cash transfers in Latin America: Review of the evidence. Inter-American Development Bank.
Molyneux, M. (2006). Mothers at the service of the new poverty agenda: Progresa/Oportunidades,
Mexico’s conditional transfer programme. Social Policy and Administration 40 (4), 425–49.
Natali, L., S. Handa, A. Peterman, D. Seidenfeld and G. Tembo (2018). Does money buy happiness?
Evidence from an unconditional cash transfer in Zambia. SSM: Population Health 4, 225–35.
Niño-Zarazúa, M. (2019). Welfare and redistributive effects of social assistance in the Global South.
UNU-WIDER.
Packard, T., U. Gentilini, M. Grosh, P. O’Keefe, R. Palacios, D. Robalino and I. Santos (2019). Protecting
All: Risk Sharing for a Diverse and Diversifying World of Work. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Paiva, L.H., F. Veras Soares, F. Cireno, I. Azevedo Vitelli Viana and A.C. Duran (2016). The effects
of conditionality monitoring on educational outcomes: Evidence from Brazil’s Bolsa Familia
Programme. Brasilia: International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth.
Peterman, A., N. Kumar, A. Pereira and D.O. Gilligan (2019). Toward gender equality: A critical
assessment of evidence on social safety nets in Africa. In A.R. Quisumbing, R.S. Meinzen-Dick and
J. Njuki (eds), Gender Equality in Rural Africa: From Commitments to Outcomes. Washington, DC:
International Food Policy Research Institute, 140–8.
Schüring, E. (2012). To condition or not – is that the question? An analysis of the effectiveness of ex-ante
and ex-post conditionality in social cash transfer programs. Maastricht University.
UNDP (2019). The state of social assistance in Africa. New York.
World Bank (2015). The state of social safety nets 2015. Washington, DC.
World Bank (2018). The state of social safety nets 2018. Washington, DC.
World Bank (n.d.). The atlas of social protection indicators of resilience and equity. datatopics​.worldbank​
.org​/​aspire/​indicator/​social​-​​assistance

Esther Schüring - 9781839109119
Downloaded from Elgar Online at 02/23/2022 07:54:24PM
via William and Mary School of Law

