8

research paper

ilo future of work
research paper series

Finding proactive features
in labour market policies:
A reflection based on the
evidence

Miguel
Á. Malo

University
of Salamanca,
Spain

Copyright © International Labour Organization 2018
First published 2018
Publications of the International Labour Office enjoy copyright under Protocol 2 of the Universal Copyright
Convention. Nevertheless, short excerpts from them may be reproduced without authorization, on condition
that the source is indicated. For rights of reproduction or translation, application should be made to ILO
Publications (Rights and Licensing), International Labour Office, CH-1211 Geneva 22, Switzerland, or by
email: rights@ilo.org. The International Labour Office welcomes such applications.
Libraries, institutions and other users registered with a reproduction rights organization may make copies in
accordance with the licences issued to them for this purpose. Visit www.ifrro.org to find the reproduction
rights organization in your country.

Finding proactive features in labour market policies: A reflection based on the evidence
ISBN 978-92-2-031131-8 (print)
ISBN 978-92-2-131132-5 (web pdf)
International Labour Office – Geneva: ILO, 2018

The designations employed in ILO publications, which are in conformity with United Nations practice, and
the presentation of material therein do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the
International Labour Office concerning the legal status of any country, area or territory or of its authorities,
or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers.
The responsibility for opinions expressed in signed articles, studies and other contributions rests solely with
their authors, and publication does not constitute an endorsement by the International Labour Office of the
opinions expressed in them.
Reference to names of firms and commercial products and processes does not imply their endorsement by the
International Labour Office, and any failure to mention a particular firm, commercial product or process is
not a sign of disapproval.
Information on ILO publications and digital products can be found at: www.ilo.org/publns.
This publication was produced by the Document and Publications Production,
Printing and Distribution Branch (PRODOC) of the ILO.
Graphic and typographic design, layout and composition,
printing, electronic publishing and distribution.
PRODOC endeavours to use paper sourced from forests managed
in an environmentally sustainable and socially responsible manner.
Code: DTP-SCR-REP

Finding proactive features
in labour market policies:
A reflection based on the
evidence
Miguel Á. Malo*
University of Salamanca, Spain

*	This article has been prepared on behalf of the Research Department of the International Labour
Organization. I gratefully acknowledge the insightful comments from Hannah Johnston, Verónica
Escudero and Martin Ostermeier, and the anonymous reviewers. I take responsibility for any remaining
errors and for the opinions included in the text. Contact: malo@usal.es.

iii

Abstract
Proactive labour market policies consist of active labour market measures or other
interventions that are implemented preemptively, with the aim of protecting people
against a wide range of labour market problems and economic shocks. Proactive policies
will be important in facing the challenges of the future of work. The discussion is
based on a review of effective active labour market policies (ALMPs) including training,
public works, direct job creation, employment incentives and job counselling and other
labour market services; specifically, it examines how ALMPs and their integration with
income support programmes can be used in a proactive manner. Throughout the paper,
differences between developed and developing and emerging countries are considered.
The paper suggests that policy implementation is crucial for a proactive approach, which
can permit the use of complementary policies and programmes with proactive and
reactive features that support activation of the labour force. It argues that social dialogue
may enhance the role of implementation variables, especially tripartite social dialogue
at an aggregate level. A combination of policies in the context of social protection floors
for developing countries and activation strategies for developed countries can also help
in the transition to an effective proactive approach.

v

Preface
In August 2017, the Director-General of the International Labour Organization convened
an independent Global Commission on the Future of Work. The Commission will produce
an independent report on how to achieve a future of work that provides decent and
sustainable work opportunities for all. This report will be submitted to the centenary
session of the International Labour Conference in 2019.
The Future of Work Research Paper Series aims to support the work of the Commission
by publishing in-depth, original studies on specific topics of interest to the Commission,
ranging from explorations of artificial intelligence and the platform economy to lifelong
learning and universal social protection. Each paper provides a critical analysis of
current and future developments and raises important questions about how to ensure a
future of inclusive development with decent work at its heart.
In a future of work facing significant challenges of labour-saving technologies, climate
adaptation policies, offshoring and reshoring, among others, there is growing interest in
the role of labour market policy to support workers through such transitions and avoid
the “scarring effects” of unemployment. This paper, by Miguel Malo, provides a very
useful state-of-the-art review of research investigating the effectiveness of active labour
market policy (ALMP). It condenses a wealth of highly technical (largely microeconomic)
empirical analysis to draw out the key points of impact, both positive and negative.
The paper separates out the design and impact of ALMP for developed and developing/
emerging countries, reflecting the different institutional context, resources and policy
design observed. Malo highlights many of the differences and intricacies of empirical
results, including that: training programmes seem to have a different impact in
developed versus developing countries; programmes targeting young people seem less
effective than all-age programmes, while the same is not true of programmes that target
women; and job effects in the short and long term need to be balanced against equity
effects (e.g. reducing disadvantage among the long-term unemployed or specific groups
of people).
Two further aspects of Malo’s review are very relevant to our future of work discussions.
The first is the need to understand the degree of “institutional complementarity” (to
use the vocabulary of the Varieties of Capitalism school of thought). The effects of
active labour market policies need to be analysed alongside interactions with so-called
“passive” labour market policies, including income protection and child-care provision,
for example, among other features of social protection and family support policy. Such
interactions are likely to differ across countries, with the implication that there is unlikely
to be a uniform effect of a given ALMP.
The second aspect is that good design and implementation depend on social dialogue
(adequately resourced and representative) and a steady political commitment to funding
ALMP. These are not easy policy instruments to get right and further research sensitive
to economic and institutional context is essential in charting responses to future
challenges in the world of work.
Miguel Á. Malo is an associate professor of economics at the University of Salamanca
(Spain). Along 2013 he worked as Senior Economist at the Research Department of the
International Labour Organization. His main research interests are evaluation of labour
market policies, analysis of labour market reforms, non-standard forms of employment,

vii

the labour market participation of people with disabilities, and the impact of labour
market performance on poverty. He has been a visiting scholar at UMIST (University of
Manchester Institute of Science and Technology), ECASS (European Centre for Analysis
in the Social Sciences, Essex University), and NBER (National Bureau of Economic
Research). From 2007 to 2009 he was President of the Spanish Association for Labour
Economics.

Damian Grimshaw
Director
Research Department

viii

1. Introduction
The great recession created a huge dislocation of many national labour markets. In
addition, the adjustment policies implemented across the globe during the recession
had an asymmetric time distribution of costs and benefits: almost all costs were in the
short term and almost all benefits were expected in the long term (ILO, 2013; Islam
and Verik, 2011). Conventional policy responses have been implemented across the
world, with and without social dialogue (Rychly, 2009), to address the problems of both
new and long-term unemployed workers, as well as others seeking work from outside
the labour market (e.g. Bonoli, 2010; Cazes, Heuer and Verick, 2011; McKenzie, 2017;
Auer, Efendioglu and Leschke, 2008).
As rapid responses to these problems, various labour market policies were implemented
reactively as a short-term answer to longer-term existing problems, sometimes even
structural ones. Some of these policies, so-called “passive” labour market policies,
sought to lessen the financial burden on workers who had been laid off, through the
provision of unemployment benefits, cash transfers and other types of income support.
These were accompanied by complementary “active” labour market policies (ALMPs),
named for their objective to activate the labour force towards reemployment. However,
due to the implementation of these policies in response to economic shocks, most policy
implementation was reactive.
This paper seeks to identify how labour market policies can become proactive. Here we
will consider that a labour market policy has proactive features when this measure or
intervention is not necessarily designed to react to a specific problem at a given moment
in the short term, but to potentially pre-empt a wide range of problems or imbalances
caused by economic shocks or other sources of unexpected changes. “Proactivity” is
thus a matter of degree, and we will review different types of labour market policies in
an attempt to determine whether they are more or less proactive.
The current reflection will mainly rest on the analysis of ALMPs; however, passive
policies are also included in the analysis. The reason for this broad-based approach
is that passive and active policies can be complementary measures, for example
in developing and emerging countries where ALMPs must include income support
because of the absence of a general unemployment benefits system. In the case of
developed countries, we will review activation strategies, which combine income support
policies with ALMPs aiming at a faster return to work or improving access to the labour
market. The paper also reviews how ALMPs can contribute to the development of
social protection floors, and can serve as a crucial element to protect workers against
unexpected risks during their working life. Overall, the paper takes a broad approach to
examining combinations of policies and the aggregate impacts of labour market policies,
with particular attention to ALMPs. Ultimately, policy implementation is found to be
a key issue that has an impact on the efficacy of specific ALMPs and their aggregate
impacts, and on the effects of the integrated approach between ALMPs and income
support policies (Schmid, 1996; Escudero, 2018). The review of the available evidence
leads us to consider that implementation remains a very important channel to imprint a
proactive feature on labour market policies.
Although the focus of this paper is on proactive implementation of ALMPs and though
we consider that more of them are needed to confront the challenges of the future of
work, policies with reactive characteristics are also required. In fact, proactive and
reactive features are complementary for a balanced design of labour market policies, as
in the case of active and passive labour market policies.

1

This paper is structured as follows. It begins by presenting the basic tenets of ALMPs
and a review of their use (Section 2). Although the evidence examined comprises mainly
impact evaluations, the review also includes evidence on the impact of ALMPs on
aggregate labour market outcomes such as national unemployment and employment
rates, and identifies features of these policies that are proactive. This is followed by
a section that examines implementation of the policies previously discussed, with
particular attention paid to the proactive features emerging from the previous review
(Section 3). A conclusion section closes the paper (Section 4).

2. Critical review of current
active labour market
policies
2.1. International experiences
Given the wide range of labour market policies, those reviewed in this article have been
selected based on their prominent position in the impact evaluation literature. Descriptive
studies and narrative reviews are used in a complementary manner to discuss policy
use and effect. However, this article’s wide use of impact evaluations does not mean
that efficiency is the only motivation for implementing labour market policies, including
ALMPs. In particular, there are deep equity reasons to implement ALMPs, such as the
support they can afford to more disadvantaged workers by increasing opportunity and
addressing structural barriers such as discrimination (Auer, Efendioglu and Leschke,
2008) or by contributing to poverty reduction or alleviation, as they may also include
income transfers. Indeed, equity is a key element in ALMP design and implementation,
and eligible beneficiaries must enjoy the same participation opportunities if ALMPs are
to be effective at improving equity (ILO, 2016).

Basic concepts
Traditionally, labour market policies are categorized as either passive or active. The first
group comprises policies that focus on income maintenance when workers are out of
employment, while the second group refers to policies aimed at increasing or improving
the employment opportunities of unemployed or inactive persons to get or return to a job.1
This classification, as outlined by the OECD (see, for example, Annex 2.b in OCED, 1993),
defines active policies as including labour market services,2 labour market training,

1 Note that the terms “active” and “passive” bear no positive or negative assessment about the effectiveness or desirability of each type
of policy. They simply refer to policies with different functions, as described in the text.
2 Labour market services refer to all interventions related to intermediation between jobseekers and employers, counselling and jobsearch assistance, provided by a public office or by a private organization. We will use the term “public employment service” for the
government institutions. Usually, these public institutions manage both active and passive policies. This terminology follows the ILO
Employment Service Convention, 1948 (No. 48). See, for example, ILO (2016). In this paper we distinguish the institution (public
employment service) from the corresponding active measures (labour market intermediation, counselling, etc.).

2

employment incentives, sheltered and supported employment and rehabilitation, direct
job creation and start-up incentives. Passive policies, on the other hand, are comprised
of unemployment insurance and benefits, redundancy and bankruptcy compensation,
and early retirement. The main features of this classification are a clear distinction
between each type of policy, and assuming implicitly that ALMPs may focus on some
activation activities while passive policies will provide simultaneous income support;
however, this definition was created within an advanced economy context, thus requiring
some modification with reference to developing and emerging countries.
There are two main differences regarding developing and emerging countries that
motivate the use of a specific classification of ALMPs (ILO, 2016; Auer, Efendioglu and
Leschke, 2008). First, different characteristics of national and regional labour markets
exist within developing countries, including higher informality, lower unemployment
and higher participation. Secondly, a lower – and many times weaker – administrative
capacity limits the scope of existing programmes (for example, a lack of unemployment
benefits) and programme implementation (Vodopivec, 2013). As a result, in developing
and emerging countries ALMPs have a wider scope which often includes income support
and other anti-poverty measures, and there is a general tendency to merge different
interventions and objectives (ILO, 2016).
Having these nuances in mind about focus, scope and configuration, the ILO (2016)
– taking into account findings from Auer, Efendioglu and Leschke (2008) – proposes
the following classification for the main types of ALMPs in developing and emerging
countries (see table 1 for a brief comparison of the ILO and OECD definitions):
(i) Training: Training programmes provide workers with opportunities to acquire or
improve on their skill portfolios. In the context of developing and emerging countries,
training programmes may be accompanied by other active measures (i.e. public works)
and may include some type of income support.
(ii) Public works: These programmes try to compensate for shortcomings in job creation
in the private sector by providing employment opportunities on public works projects.
Sometimes, they are part of public–private collaborations. While in developed countries
these types of programmes are decreasing in importance and focus on special cases
(long-term unemployed in remote areas, for example), in developing and emerging
countries they are closely related to poverty alleviation, frequently providing social and
income protection during economic downturns, and they have been gaining importance
during the last two decades.
(iii) Employment subsidies: An employment subsidy is an incentive to hiring or
maintaining jobs by reducing labour costs. The objective of these programmes is the
same in all countries, although in developing and emerging countries they are also
linked to other programmes, and aimed at hiring participants from conditional cash
transfer programmes targeted to specific groups with poor labour market outcomes
(underemployment, informality, etc.), and include money transfers subject to specific
conditions for the beneficiaries, such as school attendance by their children, healthy
habits, etc.
(iv) Self-employment and micro-enterprise creation: These policies seek to provide the
necessary supports to start an economic activity, either as self-employed or through
the development of new business opportunities. The target group of these policies is
wider in developing and emerging countries where the policies comprise employment
promotion in formal and informal economies, and are often combined with business
training, cash transfers or microcredits.

3

(v) Labour market services: Labour market services refer to all interventions aimed to
connect jobseekers and employers, through a range of activities such as counselling,
labour market intermediation and job-search assistance. These services can be provided
by the Public Employment Service of the country, by a private organization or as part
of other ALMPs. In developing and emerging countries, the role of public employment
services providing these services is more limited than in developed countries, and with
some peculiarities related to the economic context, for example including the promotion
of transitions from informal to formal employment. The limitations of public employment
services in these countries also affect the possibility of linking ALMPs with passive
policies – where they still exist – as in the case of the OECD countries.

Table 1. ALMPs: Developing and emerging countries compared to developed
countries, ILO and OECD classifications
Type of
intervention

Developing and emerging countries
(ILO 2016 classification)

Developed countries (OECD
classification)

Training

The most common type of
intervention and usually
accompanied by other interventions.

The most important type of
intervention in terms of expenditure.
Often, training targets specific
groups.

Public works

These interventions are part of
poverty alleviation and community
development measures. They also
provide social protection or income
support against negative economic
shocks. They are also combined
with other interventions, sometimes
providing assistance beyond the end
of the programme.

Since the 1990s, their importance
is rather low, although they help to
keep workers active in slow recovery
periods.

Employment
subsidies

They focus on groups of workers
with deep problems in labour market
integration and are less used during
economic recessions. They are often
conceived with a view to incentivizing
employers to hire beneficiaries of
anti-poverty programmes.

They mostly target vulnerable groups
and are often intensified during
periods of slack demand.

Self-employment
and microenterprise
creation

These are very important
interventions promoting employment
creation in both the formal and
informal economy. They are
targeted to wide groups of workers.
Sometimes, they are combined with
poverty alleviation programmes and
other interventions.

They are usually targeted to young
and higher-skilled individuals.

Labour market
services

Because of limitations to the public
resources allocated to labour market
services, their role is limited. Part
of the effort rests on improving the
efficiency of labour market services
provided, rather than creating
new institutional frameworks or
combining active with passive
policies.

The public employment service and
labour market services provided are
crucial for an effective provision of
ALMPs. They are provided directly
by the public sector or in partnership
with private actors. Sometimes, they
are combined with other ALMPs, but
also with income support policies
such as unemployment benefits.

Source: ILO, 2016.

4

Effectiveness of ALMPs in developed countries
Impact evaluations of ALMPs have been conducted in a variety of countries. While
comparing these results is not an easy task, there are a few meta-analyses on the
impact of ALMPs more generally (Card, Kluve and Weber, 2010, 2017; Eurofound,
2017; Hardoy et al., 2018; Kluve, 2010; Kluve et al., 2016; Vooren et al., 2018).
These reviews provide a general quantitative systematic review and a synthesis of the
effectiveness of many ALMPs. In reviewing the effectiveness of ALMPs in developed
countries, we discuss the main findings from these meta-analyses and provide details
on specific programmes when further clarification is of benefit.
The main conclusions of these meta-analyses are:3
• In general, the short-term impact of ALMPs is close to zero; however, the impact becomes
positive between two and three years after completion of the programme, with different
time horizons by type of programme. There are larger average gains for programmes that
emphasize human capital accumulation (Card, Kluve and Weber, 2017).
• ALMPs are more likely to show positive impacts in a recession (Kluve, 2010; Card,
Kluve and Weber, 2017). This anti-cyclical effect is much smaller than the effect of
the programme type on programme effectiveness (Kluve, 2010).4
• On average, training programmes have modest impacts (Kluve, 2010). However,
although in the short term they are often completely or almost ineffective, they have
clear positive impacts in the medium term (Card, Kluve and Weber, 2010). In fact,
Vooren et al. (2018) find positive effects of training programmes from six to 36
months after programme start, but with the same increasing pattern with time.
• Job-search assistance programmes5 yield relatively favourable short-term programme
impacts (Card, Kluve and Weber, 2010; Vooren et al., 2018), whereas subsidized
public sector employment programmes are less effective (Card, Kluve and Weber,
2010). Wage subsidies and job-search assistance can be effective in increasing
participants’ employment probability (Kluve, 2010). According to Card, Kluve and
Weber (2017) these effects are mainly in the short term, but Vooren et al. (2018),
analysing the size of these impacts, find that they are also positive in the long term
(until 36 months after finishing the programme). Vooren et al. (2018) also show that
wage subsidies and public sector employment programmes have negative short-term
impacts, but these impacts gradually turn positive in the long term.

3 Almost all these conclusions were obtained considering only whether the impact was positive or not. In the revised meta-analyses,
there are few comparisons based on the impact size of the active measures, because of the heterogeneity of the original studies and
the different labour market outcomes considered in each study. The exception is Vooren et al. (2018) who collect standardized effect
size estimates and correct by publication bias.
4 Kluve (2010) also discusses the effect of what he calls “institutional context” on effectiveness. This author considers the following
variables as institutional context at country level: index for dismissal protection regulation; index for fixed-term contract regulation;
index for temporary work regulation; and the gross replacement rate. The rationale is proxying the influence of legal regulation on the
willingness of employers to hire beneficiaries of active policies (through the above three indicators), and the willingness of beneficiaries
to take jobs (through the gross replacement rate). Therefore, these variables do not capture the institutional framework of the national
labour markets where the programmes are implemented, but only a very specific aspect of national labour regulation.
5 This job-search assistance refers to special programmes beyond the usual job-search assistance linked to receiving unemployment
benefits in most developed countries (Card, Kluve and Weber, 2010). What is considered as usual is not exactly the same in
each country, but job-search assistance always refers to special services beyond the national standard level for beneficiaries of
unemployment benefits. In Vooren et al. (2018) this type of programme is called “enhanced services” to denote the special emphasis
on additional measures such as regular encounters with caseworkers. On the other hand, job-search assistance includes not only
programmes based on special activities such as improving capacities of job-seekers, or teaching how to search for a job, but also
programmes based on sanctions and threats for a non-intensive search. However, none of these meta-analyses provide a disaggregation
of their results considering exclusively the effects of programmes only based on sanctions and threats. Therefore, this evidence is not
linked to the debate on the activation of policies, revised below in section 2.2.

5

• Employment subsidies have mainly short-term impacts but reveal little impact in the
medium and long terms. This marks a notable difference from the impacts of training
programmes. Employment subsidies are clearly more effective when targeting a specific
group of workers than when there is no targeted group (Eurofound, 2017). Nevertheless,
when a non-targeted programme of employment subsidies is implemented through
caseworkers, firms using this type of ALMP outperform other firms in terms of
employment and in other performance dimensions such as firm size, wage sum, profits,
value added and per-worker productivity (Lombardi, Skans and Vikstrom, 2018). These
effects persist until five years after the programme ends. Therefore, the intervention
of labour market services in the implementation of employment subsidies may be
beneficial both for workers and for firms. Finally, while targeting workers changes
the effectiveness of this policy, targeting different types of firms does not affect the
effectiveness of employment subsidies (Eurofound, 2017).
• In the literature, self-employment and start-up programmes are often grouped with
employment subsidies. Therefore, specific results for these interventions are not
provided. Literature that does analyse the particular impacts of self-employed and
start-up programmes is highly focused on the unemployed. Baumgartner and Caliendo
(2008), for example, find that two German programmes were effective for the
unemployed for a stable return into employment until five years after the completion
of the programme, and one of them is efficient – it saves more in income support
than the cost of the programme. Caliendo and Künn (2011), meanwhile, analyse the
heterogeneity of the same two programmes and find that start-up subsidies for the
unemployed tend to be most effective for disadvantaged groups in the labour market.
A similar result is obtained for an evaluation in the United States, but with a selfemployment training programme: the intervention helped unemployed participants to
remain self-employed five years after programme entry, but it was not effective for
participants who were not unemployed (Michaelides and Benus, 2012).
• Direct job creation in the public sector is generally less effective in terms of increasing
the probabilities of employment compared to other types of ALMPs (Kluve, 2010; Card,
Kluve and Weber, 2010). Considering different time horizons, these programmes also
tend to have much smaller or even negative average impacts in the short, medium
and long term (Card, Kluve and Weber, 2017). However, there is also evidence that
these programmes may have positive net social benefits, as in the case of Denmark
(Jespersen, Munch and Skipper, 2008). In addition, these programmes may also be
implemented not because of their effectiveness, but for equity reasons as, in developed
countries, they usually address the most disadvantaged groups of unemployed people
(Auer, Efendioglu and Leschke, 2018).
• There is systematic heterogeneity by gender, with larger impacts for specific programmes
for that target women compared to mixed programmes (Card, Kluve and Weber, 2017;
Bergemann and van den Berg, 2008).6 In mixed programmes, the impacts are more
favourable for women in economies with a lower female labour force participation,
especially in the case of training programmes (Bergemann and van den Berg, 2008).
• Programmes that target young people specifically typically have lower impacts than
mixed age programmes (Card, Kluve and Weber, 2010, 2017). There is also a nonnegligible number of specific youth programmes with no effects or non-significant
effects (Kluve et al., 2016). Among those that are effective, Hardoy et al. (2018) find

6 Card, Kluve and Weber (2010) do not find systematic differences by gender in their meta-analysis, but they explicitly recognize that this
is an anomaly with respect to the rest of the literature.

6

that training programmes and wage subsidies generally have more positive results than
other measures such as work practice and employment in the public sector, which is in
line with the results for ALMPs for all age groups revised above. However, programmes
that integrate multiple interventions and add complementary services to the main
intervention tend to do better. Following Kluve et al. (2016), the interpretation is
that the success of youth employment programmes rests on their ability to respond
to multiple needs facing a heterogeneous group of beneficiaries, and successful
youth employment programmes will need to be able to offer a comprehensive set of
interventions. These characteristics are prominent in the package of policies known as
Youth Guarantee and implemented across the European Union, as explained in box 1.
• The impact of ALMPs on older workers (typically those over 45) is not well delineated, as
this category often includes all workers over the age of 25. Until recently older workers
were often targeted for early retirement programmes or long-term unemployment subsidies
rather than for reintegration into the labour market using ALMPs (Boockmann and
Brändle, 2015). In fact, Huttunen, Pirttilä and Uusitalo (2013) find that a Finnish wage
subsidy programme targeting low-wage older workers made part-time early retirement
arrangements costlier to employers. The programme increased working hours of these

Box 1. Youth Guarantee: A package of active labour market policies
The Youth Guarantee (YG) is a policy agreed by the European Union in 2013 to fight youth
unemployment, mainly based on improving the transition from school to work (Andor and
Veselý, 2018). The objective of the YG is to “ensure that all young people under the age of 25
years receive a good-quality offer of employment, continued education, an apprenticeship or a
traineeship within a period of four months of becoming unemployed or leaving formal education”
(Council Recommendation of 22 April 2013 on establishing a Youth Guarantee, 2013/C 120/1).
Therefore, the YG is not a new type of measure, but a set of coordinated ALMPs requiring a
deep coordination of the educational system and employment services. How to decide what
measure is the best for unemployed young people requires specialized caseworkers at the public
employment offices, and a high level of coordination with training course organization by different
actors, including the public educational system. The experiences of the Nordic countries are the
benchmark for the YG, mainly the cases of Finland and Sweden (Mascherini, 2012).
Escudero and López Mourelo (2017) review the scarce literature on the effectiveness of
YG, based on impact evaluations. The available impact evaluations attend to specific parts
of the YG, such as training in Latvia, where no significant impacts were found (Bratti et al.,
2018). Hämäläinen, Hämäläinen and Tuomala (2018) evaluate the effects of the YG reform
introduced in Finland in 2005. They found small positive impacts – a 2 percentage point
increase in the activation ratio and an increase in employment of 7 days per year. However,
these positive impacts were concentrated among unemployed young persons who already had
a vocational secondary education, while there was no effect for those who were unskilled, with
only compulsory schooling.
When it comes to implementation, Escudero and López Mourelo (2017) find that while most
countries have established clear eligibility criteria and appropriate institutional frameworks, and
are providing a comprehensive package of measures, many of them are still facing challenges
when meeting the objectives of early intervention and effective enforcement mechanisms. As
Andor and Veselý (2018) remark, the YG is an ambitious change in how governments conceive
youth employment policies, and revamping and coordinating existing interventions will take time.
Especially, several European countries will need to build up administrative capacity to manage a
YG programme, which requires additional resources. In fact, resource allocations have not been
sufficient to match the recommendations (Escudero and López Mourelo, 2017). Eichorst and
Rinne (2017) remark that the actual implementation of the YG in European countries with higher
unemployment rates is far from the initial expectations, and this depends not only on enough
funding but also on effective implementation of the different interventions included in the YG.

7

workers, mainly making some former part-time workers work full time. Nevertheless, the
wage subsidy was not effective in increasing the total employment of low-wage older
workers. On the other hand, Boockmann and Brändle (2015) have evaluated a German
programme for workers aged 50 and older including coaching, counselling and casework.
The programme had positive effects, increasing employment of these workers, especially
men. Other evaluations of job counselling for older workers also show positive effects on
the job-finding rate of this group (Bollens, 2011).

Effectiveness of ALMPs in developing and emerging
countries
The literature on the effectiveness of ALMPs in developing and emerging countries often
provides different results from those for developed countries (Betcherman, Olivas and
Dar, 2004; Escudero et al., 2017; McKenzie, 2017):
• A key ALMP in developing and emerging countries is investment in public works
(McKenzie, 2017; Auer, Efendioglu and Leschke, 2008), though these initiatives are
usually regarded as poverty alleviation programmes. McKenzie (2017) argues that
direct job creation policies through public works programmes are effective because
these interventions focus on the private sector, helping firms to overcome obstacles
for innovating, growing and creating more jobs.
• The effectiveness of training programmes is relatively small compared to developed
economies (McKenzie, 2017).7 However, effects might be economically more significant
as labour markets often offer fewer possibilities, and programmes focus on groups who
are harder to assist (ILO, 2016). Escudero et al. (2017) find for Latin America and the
Caribbean countries that training programmes are only slightly more successful than
other programme types. Quite different from the results for ALMPs worldwide reviewed
above, the impact estimates from training programmes in a developing country context
do not increase over time. The reason for this difference is not clear, but probably the
human capital component may not be sufficient to generate sustained impacts. Training
programmes with a short duration (four months or less) are significantly less likely to
produce positive impact estimates, as well as training programmes with more than
one component – i.e. single-component training interventions are more likely to show
positive labour market impacts (Escudero et al., 2017).
• ALMPs in these countries seem to be working particularly well during an upswing,
suggesting that these policies will be more effective in helping individuals to obtain a
job when the labour market is already expanding. This is the opposite of the results
obtained by Card, Kluve and Weber (2017) using a worldwide sample of evaluations,
where there is a counter-cyclical pattern of programme effects.8
• The relative importance of interventions targeted at micro-entrepreneurs and small
and medium firms is also a distinctive feature in developing and emerging countries.
Usually, these programmes focus on income stabilization and poverty reduction and
are sometimes composed of different elements, including subsidies, business training
or financial facilities. In general, the results show that the impacts on employment
7 McKenzie (2017) calculates that in developing countries, a typical intervention increased employment rates by 2 percentage points.
However, usually these impacts are not statistically significant, i.e. the estimations of the impact could be zero with a non-negligible
probability. In any case, this limitation could be related to the small sample sizes frequently used in evaluation studies in developing
countries.
8 Unfortunately, there is not enough information in the above references to elucidate whether the pro-cyclical pattern is a regional
peculiarity or a typical feature of active policies in developing and emerging countries.

8

are relatively small (Grimm and Paffhausen, 2015). However, interventions focused on
promoting self-employment (new businesses) are more successful than those aiming to
increase employment in existing firms. The impact of financial interventions is weaker
than the effects of entrepreneurship training or business development services. This
is line with the trend of replacing “simple” microcredit programmes based only on
funding new or expanding small businesses by programmes adding entrepreneurship
training jointly with funding. In this line, Cho and Honorati (2014) also find that
combined packages of finance and training are more effective for promoting labour
market activity than separately providing either training or finance. This is especially
interesting, because in the studies analysed by Cho and Honorati (2014) the packages
of finance and training often targeted vulnerable groups.
• According to McKenzie (2017), programmes helping workers in intersectoral
and geographical mobility are promising, although they are complex and need
experienced providers. Successful examples include assistance with learning about
job opportunities in a different location, such as recruiting for business process
outsourcing in Indian rural villages (Jensen, 2012), or subsidizing transport for a wider
job search of young Ethiopians in different parts of Addis Ababa (Abebe et al., 2016).9
• Because of the extension of informal employment, work quality is an important
dimension in ALMPs in developing and emerging countries. Escudero et al. (2017) find
that ALMPs in these countries are particularly effective in increasing the probability
of having a formal job, compared to other labour market outcomes. Considering job
quality, training is the most important type of programme to obtain a job in the formal
sector.
• Focusing on young people, there are better results for youth compared to prime-age
workers (Escudero et al., 2017). Programmes for young people are more likely to have
a positive impact in middle- and low-income countries, and they are especially helpful
for the most vulnerable population groups – low-skilled, low-income young people,
suggesting that targeting low-income young populations in middle- and low-income
countries has more positive effects than in high-income countries (Kluve et al., 2016).
• As regards gender differences, females are more likely to benefit from ALMPs than
males (Escudero et al., 2017), as was the case for developed countries.
To sum up, the effectiveness of ALMPs in developing and emerging countries is linked
to implementation details, combination in packages with other ALMPs or with income
support policies. The combination of policies is related to an explicit poverty alleviation
objective and to the development of social protection floors, as we will see in section 2.2.

Aggregate effects
The above impact evaluations are helpful to understand the individual-level impacts
of ALMPs; however, the aforementioned analyses do not reflect the impacts of ALMPs
on aggregate variables such as total unemployment for the region or the country where
the programme was implemented. For example, training courses may improve the
employment prospects of beneficiaries but can displace workers with lower levels of
human capital who did not participate in the programmes. This can result in no overall

9 The programme evaluated by Abebe et al. (2016) included an alternative intervention consisting of training on how to make effective
job applications. Both interventions improved the quality of the jobs (more stable and formal) obtained by these young workers. The
analysis showed that the first intervention helped to overcome barriers to access to more and better vacancies by jobseekers, and the
second intervention helped young job applicants to better signal their skills to potential employers using certification of skills that are
hard to observe directly by employers, such as cognitive ability.

9

change in the unemployment rate. On the other hand, when it comes to employment
subsidies, the subsidized jobs might have been created without the intervention. Or the
formal programme can lead to displacement of some workers by those whose labour
has been targeted by the employment subsidy. These effects, termed deadweight and
displacement, are aggregate effects not necessarily captured by impact evaluations
(Heckman and Smith, 1996).
Understanding the overall impacts, including displacement effects, is important for
grasping the overall efficacy of ALMPs. Some studies have been designed to capture this
type of effect in local labour markets, showing that displacement may exist, leading to
very small net effects of ALMPs, as shown by Crépon et al. (2013) for a programme for
jobseekers in France. It has also been found that displacement effects may be related
to implementation characteristics of policies. Lombardi, Skans and Vikstrom (2017),
for example, use Swedish data to show that the intervention of the public employment
offices in subsidy allocation can have a positive impact on net employment in subsidized
firms, but this does not happen when all firms have access to employment subsidies.
While deadweight can be considered a net social loss, displacement is different. A policy
targeting a very disadvantaged group may increase the labour market participation of
the group of beneficiaries instead of other workers who might have been hired. The
aggregate net effect would be zero in terms of employment, but disadvantaged workers
would be better off. Therefore, a labour market policy creating a displacement effect
may be defensible for equity reasons, which is not the case for deadweight losses.
Aggregate impact analysis provides a sort of “macro” evaluation of the impact of ALMPs
on different labour market outcomes (including the unemployment rate, the proportion
of long-term unemployment, and the outflow rate from unemployment to employment)
which takes into account indirect effects such as displacement (Bellman and Jackman,
1996; Koning, 2001). There are two main strands in this aggregate literature. The first
one analyses the macroeconomic effects of labour market institutions and reforms of
which ALMPs are one component among others (e.g. Scarpetta, 1996; Murtin and de
Serres, 2014; Blanchard and Wolfers, 2000), while the second focuses on the aggregate
effects of ALMPs specifically, from a macro perspective.
When it comes to the macroeconomic effects of labour market institutions generally, the
research has found that ALMPs decrease the unemployment rate, but have a relatively
small aggregate impact (Scarpetta, 1996). Results are similar when focusing on the
aggregate unemployment outflow rate. In other words, ALMPs increase the outflow
from unemployment, improving job creation.10 Even when considering the interaction
of policies and economic shocks, an increase in ALMP spending leads to a decrease in
the unemployment rate when there is a negative shock (Blanchard and Wolfers, 2000).
Therefore, these aggregate results are consistent with those obtained in the impact
evaluations of programmes reviewed in previous sections.
The second strand focuses specifically on the aggregate effects of ALMPs and, in
some cases, even disaggregating the analysis by type of ALMP (e.g. OECD, 1993;
Koning and Mosley, 2001; Estevão, 2007; Baker et al., 2005; Bassanini and Duval,
2006; Escudero, 2018). In general, this literature remarks the complementarity between

10 Murtin and de Serres (2014) estimate the impact of policy variables on labour market tightness measured as the ratio of job vacancies
to unemployment. The interpretation is the following: as a larger ALMP spending increases this ratio, there will be more vacancies for
the same level of unemployed people or, alternatively, for the same level of vacancies there will be fewer unemployed jobseekers.

10

ALMPs, unemployment insurance and related welfare benefit systems (Martin, 2015).11
The complementary role of ALMPs is stressed by Estevão (2007). His results show that
ALMPs raise employment through labour market adjustments,12 but at the same time
do not substitute for other labour market policies.13 Focusing on specific policies, some
aggregate evaluations show that countries spending much more in employment subsidies
do not improve aggregate transitions into employment because of displacement and
deadweight effects (Arranz, Garcia Serrano and Hernanz, 2013).14
Interestingly, the research finds that aggregate labour market outcomes are also
impacted by variations in how ALMPs are implemented. Using a database from 31
advanced economies for the period 1985–2010, Escudero (2018) finds that ALMPs
have non-negligible effects on aggregate labour market outcomes and confirms that
these effects arise mainly through the implementation features of these policies.
Her analysis shows that allocating more resources to programme administration has
positive effects, and the same happens with the continuity of public spending in active
measures – i.e. fluctuations in public budget exceeding the business cycle swings. This
is consistent with the reviewed results from impact evaluations of specific programmes,
where implementation was also revealed as a key variable to obtain positive impacts,
and potentially linked to proactive features of different ALMPs.
In terms of specific collectives, Escudero (2018) shows that start-up incentives and
measures for vulnerable groups are more effective than other ALMPs in reducing
unemployment and increasing employment. In addition, they are also more beneficial for
low-skilled workers. Probably, this is related to the “double dividend” of these policies
whereby subsidized firms not only create additional jobs – particularly for low-skilled
workers – but also contribute to positive effects via start-up incentives (Caliendo and
Künn, 2014).
Finally, a key issue about policy implementation at an aggregate level is how to
coordinate all interventions, balancing the different objectives of labour market policies.
In this vein, social dialogue is the way to improve specific and aggregate effectiveness
of labour market policies and to balance measures affecting different groups of workers.
More specifically, tripartite and bipartite social dialogue may find a balance between
ALMPs and other measures to enhance proactive features but maintain reactive features
when needed by some groups of workers – as shown in the case on short-time work and
ALMPs for disadvantaged groups described in box 2.

11 Martin (2015) provides a narrative review of the bulk of these macroeconomic evaluations, jointly with the results of impact evaluations
of specific programmes focusing on OECD countries.
12 In other words, a higher ALMP expenditure is associated with a larger adjustment in wages for the same level of unemployment.
13 In particular, a huge increase in ALMP expenditure to replace other policies would probably be linked to an increase in taxes, with
potentially negative effects on labour supply (Estevão, 2007).
14 Arranz, Garcia Serrano and Hernanz (2013) present an aggregate impact analysis of ALMPs in Spain, where employment subsidies were
widely used from 1997 to 2006. They also find positive, but small, effects of training on different aggregate labour market outcomes.

11

Box 2. Balancing policies: Social dialogue, short-time work and ALMPs
The great recession led many governments to intensify their appeal to social partners to negotiate
or participate in joint consultations. In general, when governments turn to the social partners
at the early stage of the crisis, the policies implemented are more likely to be in line with the
needs of all participants in the labour market. According to Rychly (2009), the recent crisis has
led to a more proactive approach towards social dialogue and collective bargaining even in less
dialogue-oriented countries, not only in Europe but also in Asia and Latin America. However,
in other countries the first attempts to manage the employment impacts of the great recession
through social dialogue were unfruitful. For example, Spain was one of the first countries where
the social partners discussed anti-crisis measures (as early as the summer of 2008), but only
one-off agreements were made – when reached – and tripartite social dialogue remains weak
(ILO, 2014). Comprehensive legally binding tripartite or bipartite agreements were reached only
in Japan, the Republic of Korea and South Africa as an answer to the great recession across the
world (Rychly, 2011).
The importance of bipartite social dialogue during the great recession is exemplified by the
German model. The use of short-time work schemes to preserve jobs in Germany has been an
example for many other countries, where governments decided, in line with the claims of the
social partners, to improve the conditions of workers affected by shorter working hours and thus
lower wages (Rychly, 2009). In the German case, the Government extended short-time working
allowances very generously (Bosch, 2011). According to Knuth (2014) short-time work accounted
for about one third of the absorption of the economic shock.
As short-time work usually includes workers’ compensation – for example, via partial
unemployment benefits – or training, this measure may be considered as a policy for incumbent
workers with proactive features (these features are discussed in more detail in the following
section). In any case, short-time work seems to be more useful for temporary negative shocks
or as a first step toward a permanent adjustment in a less traumatic way, but with no clear
aggregate effects on the labour market in the long term (Cahuc and Carcillo, 2011). In this vein,
international evidence (Hijzen and Martin, 2013) supports the theory that short-time work helped
to preserve a significant number of jobs during the great recession, but that its continued use
during the recovery may have affected the content of jobs during that time. Therefore, although a
significant gross positive impact on the number of jobs in most – developed – countries analysed
was shown, the net effect on aggregate employment of short-time work schemes was negligible or
even negative. Through case studies of developed countries, Thelen (2014) shows that countries
more tied to short-time work spend less on ALMPs, and the converse. She interprets short-time
work as support for “insiders”, while active policies would be mainly support for the “outsiders”
of the labour market – i.e. precarious workers. Following this interpretation, a continuous support
for short-time work would move the adjustment towards precarious workers, hence the negligible
impact of short-time work on aggregate employment in the long term.
ALMPs target vulnerable groups of workers, and these workers are traditionally not covered by
social dialogue (Vaughan-Whitehead, 2011), unlike other measures such as short-time work.
It is important to note that when social dialogue – especially tripartite social dialogue – deals
with ALMPs it is possible to reach a balance between protection for incumbent workers and
greater opportunities for disadvantaged workers, with consequent positive impacts on aggregate
employment in the long term.

12

2.2. Combinations of policies: Activation
strategies and social protection floors
Activation strategies in developed economies
In the 1990s, the term “activation strategies” was frequently used in developed countries
to underscore a combination of income support policies – mainly unemployment
insurance and assistance – with different ALMPs, including different degrees of
conditionality on job-search intensity (Martin, 2015; Immervoll and Scarpetta, 2012).
The general objective was to speed up the transition from non-employment into jobs.
International organizations, such as the OECD and the European Commission, promoted
activation as a key issue to improve the management and outcomes of labour market
policies.15
This strategy of activation soon spread across the European Union and other advanced
economies. Weishaupt (2011) analyses this trajectory as a convergence in welfare
interventions at international level with two main institutional regime types: the Nordic
model, with high levels of activation and economic activity, and state-led child-care
provision; and the Anglophone model, based on “making work pay”, focusing on
individual responsibility, and more market mechanisms.16 Of course, these are “pure”
or “ideal” types, and they have evolved over time. For example, the Nordic model
has become more concerned with cost containment and effectiveness of programmes.
Meanwhile, the Anglophone model – at least in some countries such as Ireland – has
included elements of the service-centred Nordic model. Moreover, the development of
the Lisbon strategy in the European Union has led continental European countries to
different combinations of the two models (Weisshaupt, 2011), increasing their reliance
on market forces (as in the Anglophone model) with a more interventionist role for the
State (as in the Nordic model).
Although activation strategies in developed countries vary, there are number of core
elements that are shared. In terms of labour market policies, all countries that have
implemented activation strategies include early interventions, individually-tailored case
management, and benefits conditionality. Additionally, when it comes to employment
protection, countries have an enlarged scope of labour market services provided by
the public employment office, including the work-first principle (or acquiring skills
through working), an expansion of state-led child-care provision, and incentives for
work (“making work pay”). Finally, activation strategies in a developed country context
include: management by objectives, independent review and/or focus on quality
management, fusion of employment and welfare agencies, introduction of quasimarkets, and customer orientation (Weishaupt, 2011).
This activation paradigm has resulted in distinct advantages. According to the OECD
(2013), the general lessons of the activation strategies from a review of a handful of
countries include the following:17

15 See OECD (2013) and Martin (2015) for a review of how the activation strategies for labour market policies became dominant in the
OECD countries since the 1990s.
16 The reasoning of Weishaupt (2011) is based on the three worlds of welfare state proposed by Esping-Andersen (1990): Anglophone,
Continental, and Nordic models. The Continental model falls between the other two.
17 The countries reviewed in OECD (2013) were Australia, Finland, Ireland, Japan, Norway, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.

13

• A well-developed system of unemployment income support can benefit from an
employment-focused activation system through job-search assistance, reducing
barriers to employment and training programmes, and backed up when necessary by
different types of sanctions18 or mandatory referrals. Nevertheless, there is no unique
unemployment benefits design or combination of passive and active measures for an
effective activation. With national variations, an individual action plan is widely used.
These individual plans are designed in collaboration with specialized counsellors and
include different interventions considering the labour market problems and the local
economy context for each individual.
• Reforms to activate beneficiaries of unemployment insurance and assistance require
care and may take time to increase the employment rates of beneficiary groups.
• Institutional reforms are a critical component of activation strategies. The main features
of these reforms are organizational mergers and labour market services that combine
employment assistance with benefit administration – for example, the merging of the
public employment service and the benefit agency in the United Kingdom.19
• Management improvements increase the effectiveness of public and private
employment services. These improvements were guided not only by establishing
targets for the performance of public and private employment services but by adapting
these targets to local conditions and to the employability of jobseekers, as in Austria
and Switzerland (OECD, 2013).
In some countries, activation strategies have been implemented by combining labour
market services and training using market-based mechanisms. The case of the
programme Workforce Investment Act in the United States is a prominent example of
a shift of initiatives – here, at the state level – towards a business-oriented, demanddriven system (King and Barnow, 2009). Probably, the key in this intervention is a sort
of voucher – the so-called Individual Training Accounts – which allowed participants to
select their own training provider and occupational programme. The evidence on the
effectiveness of these vouchers is mixed, showing that disadvantaged workers frequently
overreached in selecting programmes (Barnow, 2009), although they are popular among
participants and generally accepted as a useful feature of the programme because local
boards can put some limits on the choice of participants, providing strong guidance
(King and Barrow, 2009).20
A key issue of the debate on activation has been how effective the strategy is in times
of crisis. Martin (2015) reviews what happened in the OECD countries with activation
strategies during the great recession, suggesting that in countries that had implemented
successful activation strategies before the crisis, unemployment rose less than in other
countries. However, this author also remarks that during the recession the European
Nordic countries provide some evidence for a change in focus from a “work-first” to a
“train-first” approach. This would be coherent with the results on an anti-cyclical pattern
in the effectiveness of training programmes in developed countries (see section 2.1).

18 The review by Meyer (1995) of different unmonitored US job-search programmes found that there was consistently an increase in
unemployment duration (around three weeks more). However, job-search monitoring does not always improve job finding, especially
when monitoring is very intensive. Klepinger, Johnson and Joesch (2002) evaluated the impact of different job-search requirements
in a US programme, and found that variations of the programme with the strongest requirements decreased the duration of insured
unemployment but did not increase job finding. There is also empirical evidence that although monitoring and sanctions can accelerate
the return to work, they may also decrease the quality of accepted jobs (Arni, Lalive and Van Ours, 2013).
19 According to the OECD (2013), this merger in the United Kingdom improved the employment outcomes of jobseekers and was costeffective.
20 For a full description of the characteristics of this programme, see Barnow (2009).

14

From a wider perspective, empirical evidence also shows that activation strategies
increase the likelihood of benefit recipients moving from unemployment into employment
in recession years (Michaelides and Mueser, 2017; Martins and Costa, 2014), although
more research is needed.

Social protection floors in developing and emerging
countries
Since the 1990s there has been increasing interest in implementing anti-poverty
policies in low- and middle-income countries, while at the same time finding ways to
combat dependency on public income support schemes (Almeida et al., 2011). These
goals have helped to shape an approach that combines ALMPs and income support
programmes in developing and emerging countries. At the same time, there is an
increasing trend in linking income support with a “promotion” function that requires
those receiving benefits from social assistance to also participate in education, health
and nutrition services, with the goal of improving earnings and opportunities through
programmes promoting higher employability (Robalino, Walker and Rawlings, 2012). In
other words, the ambition of social protection in developing countries is not restricted
to compensating those in poverty for their lack of income, but rather aimed at providing
populations with the tools to achieve more sustainable sources of livelihood for the
purpose of broader development (Barrientos and Hulme, 2009; Barrientos, 2011).21
The objective of reducing poverty is only one of the objectives of social protection:
beyond providing basic income security, social protection must contribute to increase
opportunities of households to access better and higher quality forms of sustainable
income generation. The combination of “traditional” or “simple” ALMPs with elements
related to income support, small business promotion, or investment has created new
policies adapted to the reality of developing and emerging countries.
In different degrees, all these policies are concerned about incentive compatibility and
anti-poverty strategies – they focus not only on employment or earnings but mainly
on development. Almeida et al. (2011) suggest that there are two different kinds of
policies: interventions to improve access to jobs and earnings opportunities, which are
complementary to employment-related support services when targeting groups facing
multiple barriers to work; and graduation policies with a poverty exit ambition and
targeting beneficiaries of social assistance programmes.22
Some policies, such as conditional cash transfers, may be considered as being between
each of these categories. These policies consist of an income transfer to targeted
households conditional on some requisites, for example children’s school attendance,
improving health conditions of the household, etc. A common concern in the design
of these income transfers has been the impact on labour force participation. There
are different evaluations showing that these programmes do not appear to discourage
beneficiaries from participating in the labour market (Almeida et al., 2011) and even

21 In this context, the ILO adopted in 2012 the Recommendation concerning national floors of social protection, No. 202. In this
Recommendation, a social protection floor is defined as a combination of income and health security provided through cash transfers
and transfers in kind including in the form of access to essential social services (Cichon, 2014). The ILO strategy promoting social
protection floors includes support at country level, contribution to global strategies, policies and debates on social protection floors,
and work in knowledge management and sharing experiences (ILO, 2017).
22 At first sight, the development of social protection shares with the activation strategies the combination of policies and, sometimes,
conditionality. However, there is a key difference: while social protection floors in developing and emerging countries have an explicit
anti-poverty objective, activation strategies in developed countries are policies to fight unemployment but they are not part of antipoverty policies of these countries. For a discussion on the activation and graduation policy terminology, see Almeida et al. (2011).

15

that in some cases the programmes create incentives for participants to work or look for
work (ILO, 2010). Box 3 develops the issue of the impact of conditional transfers and
graduation policies on labour market outcomes.

Box 3. The impact of conditional cash transfers and graduation policies on labour market
outcomes
Conditional transfers and graduation policies are development policies implemented around
the world. The design of both types of policy combine income transfers with other measures.
In the case of conditional transfers, income is conditioned on eliminating child labour through
school assistance, for example, or conditioned on healthy practices. Although both policies
target households in severe poverty, graduation policies (which have a poverty exit ambition)
target the poorest members of villages providing income jointly with training, coaching, health
information, etc. For this reason, graduation policies are also known as “ultrapoor” policies. They
often include specific direct funding to improve the family small business. In other cases, there
are also occasional transfers to finance basic goods for household consumption. The objective
is always to uplift the low initial endowment base of the household so that it can gain access to
other economic and social resources (Halder and Mosley, 2004).
Usually, these policies are evaluated in terms of their impacts on different dimensions of wellbeing such as consumption, health or empowerment, but also on economic outcomes such as
savings, business profits, investment or employment. Kabeer and Waddington (2015) present a
meta-analysis of conditional transfers using 46 studies analysing different household impacts in
developing countries. As regards the effects on household adult labour supply, they find mixed
evidence. The overall impact is an increase of 3 percentage points in the labour participation
of household adults, but this effect ranges from an adverse effect of 5 percentage points to a
growth of 12 percentage points in the labour participation of adults. This suggests that income
transfer has an income effect, but, in general, it is not necessarily enough for a significant
increase in labour participation. For the effects on child labour, the evidence strongly suggests
a decrease in child labour through increasing school attendance.
Banerjee et al. (2015) evaluate the impact of a multifaceted graduation programme for the
very poor in six developing countries. Therefore, their results are a meta-analysis of these
programmes, but based on much more homogeneous programme characteristics than usual.
They test the impacts on different social and economic outcomes of poor households. Concerning
labour outcomes, they find overall positive impacts on total time spent working, with a positive
impact on more time working in a micro-enterprise and a negative impact on time spent in paid
labour, but neither effect is statistically significant.
There are many evaluations showing that these types of policies, designed as packages of various
ALMPs or ALMPs provided jointly with income support, are, in general, effective. Hashemi and
Rosenberg (2006) find that a public works programme in Bangladesh increased self-employment
among beneficiaries of social protection programmes. Macours, Schady and Vakis (2012) analyse
Nicaragua’s “Atención a Crisis” programme and suggest that the integrated approach of the
programme promotes reskilling and adaptation to a changing employment situation. Martínez,
Puentes and Ruiz-Tagle (2018) find that a Chilean conditional cash transfer programme (“Chile
Solidario”) has long-lasting employment effects, increasing labour market participation and
earnings.

16

3. Identifying proactive
features: The key role
of implementation
ALMPs have had different roles over time. They began in the 1950s in Sweden as a
supplementary set of macroeconomic policies for sustaining a non-inflationary growth,
and evolved into a mechanism to help manage labour market flows (Weishaupt, 2011).
The joint implementation of ALMPs and income support programmes that has developed
since the 1990s has also altered the divide between passive and active policies, showing
that they can be complementary and interrelated (Auer, Efendioglu and Leschke, 2008).
Over the great recession, ALMPs were used as a reaction against the huge and fast
increase in unemployment, especially in the European Union. In many EU countries,
ALMPs were one of the most popular areas of intervention (ILO, 2015). In addition, as
Auer, Efendioglu and Leschke (2008) remark, most countries with high levels of global
economic integration utilize ALMPs to mitigate the negative employment effects of
globalization and technological change.
ALMPs are well suited to proactive implementation, and can be used to help anticipate
a wide menu of labour market changes and challenges that may affect workers’ welfare
and the economy more broadly. In fact, implementation seems to be a key channel for
enhancing proactive characteristics in labour market policies in developing and emerging
countries as well as developed economies.

The central role of implementation
From a macroeconomic perspective, key implementation characteristics that increase
the effectiveness of ALMPs include the allocation of additional resources to programme
administration, and a continuity of public spending in active measures that increases
during recessions but does not fade away during times of growth (Escudero, 2018). At
this aggregate level, implementation may be improved through social dialogue, especially
tripartite social dialogue (Rychly, 2009, 2011). As some authors have remarked,
bipartite social dialogue mainly attends to interventions for incumbent workers. ALMPs,
on the other hand, are typically directed towards individuals who are less likely to be
covered by bipartite negotiation (Thelen, 2014; Vaughan-Whitehead, 2011) as they
are also aimed at inactive persons. For this reason, tripartite social dialogue, which
includes employer and worker representation as well as government participation, may
be better suited for input and development of macro-oriented labour market policies.
However, the specific role of the social partners in the implementation of ALMPs and
how it affects their effectiveness and the emergence of proactive and reactive features
remains an open topic. As far as we know, there is a short and relatively recent literature
for developed countries on the direct engagement of employers in ALMPs. This research
shows that there is room for more extensive involvement from employers (see box 4),
but that further research is needed to assess to what extent employer involvement will
be either proactive or reactive.

17

Box 4. The engagement of employers in ALMPs: The Danish case
Research focusing on the engagement of employers with ALMPs is rather scarce. Bredgaard
(2017) is one exception, analysing empirically the case of Denmark.
This author proposes a typology of four types of employers, distinguishing positive and
negative preferences from participation and non-participation in ALMPs. These four types
are: the committed employer, the sceptical employer, the passive employer and the dismissive
employer. The committed employer has a positive attitude towards ALMPs and participates
in them, while the dismissive employer has a negative attitude and does not participate. The
other two types are intermediate cases: the sceptical employer has a negative attitude but
participates, and the passive employer has a positive attitude but does not participate in
these policies.
Bredgaard’s survey of Danish employers based on these concepts shows that most employers
are dismissive (46%) or passive (35%) with respect to ALMPs, and that only a minority can
be considered as sceptical (8%) or committed employers (11%). As passive employers are not
enrolled in ALMPs, but have a positive attitude, Bredgaard considers that they may be able to
be convinced of the usefulness of these policies – for example, he suggests improving their
collaboration with the local job centres – and there is wide room for enrolment of employers in
ALMPs.
According to Bredgaard, a deeper and more systematic knowledge about why and how employers
engage in ALMPs would improve the effectiveness of these programmes.

The implementation of a combined set of policies – different types of ALMPs or
ALMPs with income support policies – has shown an important potential to enhance
the proactive nature of different labour market policies. These combinations may act
in a proactive manner by helping to strengthen social protection floors. In developed
countries these combinations include, for example, individualized plans combining
income support (passive policies) and labour market integration activities – training, jobsearch activities and monitoring, etc. The package of policies known as Youth Guarantee
(see box 1) is also a promising way to enhance proactive features for young people, as
they improve their labour market integration with different interventions addressing not
only the short-term problems of young unemployed but also trying to remove long-term
drawbacks such as lack of enough formal training.
In developing and emerging countries the combined approach, implementing ALMPs
jointly with income support and basic services such as education and health, is aimed
to target specifically the poorest households. Graduation policies are a prominent
example. They aim to address short-term problems such as low incomes, but have also
a wider anti-poverty perspective adding other interventions to overcome poverty traps.
More specifically, we detect proactive features in policies combining self-employment
or small business promotion and management training in graduation policies. This
type of policy not only strengthens the economic fabric of local economies, but also
provides incentives for self-sustaining earnings which may in turn reduce poverty. The
evidence for Latin America and the Caribbean (Escudero et al., 2017) also shows that
ALMPs in these countries have the potential to increase access to formal employment,
which we consider an important proactive characteristic because an increase in formal
employment improves resilience to diverse negative economic shocks.

18

Proactive features in specific policies
Considering specific programmes, we have also shown that implementation
characteristics are important and that, in addition, each type of programme presents
proactive or reactive features. We present here a summary for each type of ALMP
following the order of table 1.

(i)

Training

Training programmes share reactive and proactive characteristics. Training courses may
be clearly reactive when they are intended to provide specific skills to fill vacancies
in the local economy. Proactive features may be associated with increasing general
rather than job-specific human capital, as general human capital can be applied to
many different jobs. It may also be reflected in the proactive retraining of workers in
response to anticipated changes in labour market needs. Therefore, the main emphasis
in providing this training would be on the government (as a policy) and not on the
firms.23 The analysis of the US case using market-based mechanisms with training
vouchers to cover needs of local firms – linked to increases in specific human capital –
shows mixed results (Barnow, 2009). Their usually positive evaluation is mostly linked
to the engagement of caseworkers and counsellors – which, again, highlights the role of
implementation and the need for a combination of policies to develop proactive features.
The predominant role of proactive features is clear when assessing training interventions
in developed countries. For example, evaluations show that the effectiveness of training
is rather low in the short term, but clearly positive in the medium and long terms (Card,
Kluve and Weber, 2010, 2017; Vooren et al., 2018). This feature links training with
building capacities to adapt to labour market challenges beyond the short term and the
specific problems of local labour markets. On the other hand, in these countries the
impact of training programmes is larger during crisis and smaller in good times, thereby
indicating the reactive efficacy of these measures as well. However, the evidence also
shows that this counter-cyclical pattern is not so large compared to the always positive
effects of training compared to other types of ALMPs. Therefore, in developed countries
the reactive feature derived from the anti-cyclical pattern may be less important
compared to the effects associated with their proactive features.
For developing and emerging countries – at least based on the available evidence for
Latin America and the Caribbean – the impact of training programmes is pro-cyclical
(larger in expansions and smaller during crisis). At first sight, this pro-cyclical pattern
is rather proactive. Then, are training programmes clearly proactive in developing and
emerging countries? We have to remark that, at the same time, the review shows that
impacts of training are shorter-lived in developing and emerging countries, probably
because their funding is insufficient for a long and in-depth implementation (Auer,
Efendioglu and Leschke, 2008). This lack of long-term effects limits the proactive
features of training in emerging and developing countries but could probably be
overcome through adequate and sustained funding.

23 This follows the traditional rule of how to fund general and specific human capital (Becker, 1964), although this general rule has been
qualified in recent years. Acemoglu and Pischke (1998) have explained that firms are more likely to be interested in funding general
human capital in imperfect labour markets where wages are compressed. Lazear (2008) has shown that even in the case of general
skills, their combination in a job is rather specific, and wage profiles and the split of human capital costs depend on thickness of the
market. Gathman and Schönberg (2010) show that skills are more portable (more “general”) than usually assumed, as workers move
to occupations with similar task requirements.

19

(ii)

Public works and direct job creation

In developed countries, public works and direct job creation programmes are rather
limited and restricted to very specific groups of disadvantaged workers. Often, they
have neither positive nor negative effects, and when they have a positive impact, such
effect is the smallest relative to other ALMPs (Kluve, 2010; Card, Kluve and Weber,
2010, 2017). The main rationale for these programmes in developed countries is
not effectiveness but equity, such as providing a sheltered and partial labour market
integration to people otherwise excluded from the labour market. In these terms, they
are more reactive than proactive, but this distinction does not seem as relevant in this
case as equity reasons are probably much more important than efficiency.
Public works and direct job creation may hold greater promise for proactive
implementation in the case of developing and emerging countries, where these
programmes have a wider presence and play a greater role of providing income support
for specific groups and/or in case of bad economic conditions (Auer, Efendioglu and
Leschke, 2008). Specifically in a developing and emerging country context, these types
of ALMPs can be implemented as one component of a broader social protection floor
strategy. They achieve this by combining income support and other interventions, such
as training, to improve labour market integration of beneficiaries and with an objective
of alleviating poverty. In these terms and combined with other policies within a social
protection floor strategy, these policies may be considered as proactive, because they
provide income and social protection against different situations and, at the same time,
may improve labour market integration in the medium and long term.

(iii) Employment subsidies
Employment subsidies are more a developed-country type of ALMP, probably given their
relatively costly implementation. Their effectiveness is mainly restricted to the short
term and is clear only when targeting specific disadvantaged groups. For these reasons,
this type of ALMP has strongly reactive features.
However, reactive features of employment subsidies have been very useful in achieving
short-term results for some groups of workers who face long-term labour market
integration obstacles, such as older unemployed workers (Boockmann and Brändle,
2015). The reviewed evidence for developed countries shows that employment subsidies
for older workers may be effective, especially when combined with counselling and other
labour market services to attend their potential health and social problems. On the
other hand, there is also evidence showing that employment incentives may overcome
displacement effects, if subsidies are implemented through caseworkers. Again, we
appreciate that implementation characteristics are crucial to enhancing the effectiveness
of policies and their proactive or reactive features, which could be achieved by the joint
implementation of employment subsidies with caseworkers.
Finally, the analysis of this policy clearly shows a key issue mentioned in the introduction:
reactive features may be crucial for some groups of workers and, therefore, they are also
needed in a balanced design of labour market policies.24

24 When it comes to the possibility of proactively implementing employment subsidies, there may be room for their consideration in
industry transformation, by helping to draw unemployed workers into a sector where future need and growth has proactively been
identified. While no research is available thus far to support possible use to this effect, it may be helpful to consider the economic and
policy implications of using employment subsidies more proactively as we enter a future where labour market transitions increase.

20

(iv) Self-employment and micro-enterprise creation
ALMPs that promote self-employment and micro-enterprise creation have strong
proactive features, and there is strong empirical evidence demonstrating their
effectiveness in both developed and developing economies. In developed countries they
have long-lasting effects, especially for disadvantaged groups of previously unemployed
workers (Baumgartner and Caliendo, 2008; Caliendo and Künn, 2011).
In the case of developing and emerging countries, evaluations reviewed in previous
sections show that these interventions are effective when combined with some type of
management training – as in graduation policies. Note that providing training for small
entrepreneurs increases their human capital and they become more resilient to future
changes in the economic context – i.e. they will tackle difficult managerial problems
better. In addition, these combinations also have an anti-poverty objective as part of
the strategy of enhancing social protection floors. Therefore, funding for start-ups and
improving current small businesses – explicitly including self-employed workers – have
proactive features in developing and emerging countries.

(v)

Labour market services

Labour market services can play a crucial role in improving the overall implementation
of ALMPs, as well as in providing important tools to help workers better navigate labour
markets. They are therefore identified as having prime importance in transitioning toward
a more proactive policy approach to labour markets. In developed countries, there is
a key role for caseworkers, for example, in some employment incentives programmes
where the intervention of these workers avoided the displacement effects which are
typical of employment incentives that are not sufficiently targeted (Lombardi, Skans and
Vikstrom, 2018). In fact, the role of caseworkers in these programmes was to provide
support in hiring and, indirectly, to create a kind of targeting. Therefore, the added value
of labour market intermediation in employment incentive policies is in making them
targeted. In addition, labour market services are key elements in activation strategies.
Enhanced job-search assistance, for example, is one of the policies increasing the
probability of return to work when linked to income support policies. Probably, simple
public or private labour market intermediation may be considered as reactive – i.e.
placing non-employed people into available vacancies as quickly as possible. However,
in combination with other measures it provides more effective and stable labour market
integration, which is clearly a proactive feature.
Another aspect shown in the review of the empirical evidence for developing countries
was that some policies needed well-trained staff – as in the case of job applications
training and transport subsidies to improve job-matching quality for jobseekers. To
sustain the quality of the staff required to correctly implement these policies, middleand low-income countries must develop effective labour market services. Because of
the usual limitations on public funding, long-term public–private partnerships may
be considered. A permanent organization to provide labour market services would be
helpful in developing such services with proactive characteristics in developing and
emerging countries.

21

4. Conclusions
Finding and implementing successful responses to the great recession has for many
years been of major concern to policy-makers. Once the recovery spread around the
globe, there were new challenges for labour market policies. The increased emphasis on
ALMPs arose as one solution to meet these challenges, but also as a way of responding
to longer-term trends such as globalization, technological change or environmental
degradation. ALMPs also have the potential to address unexpected future change. In
this context, this paper has reviewed the different types of ALMPs, as well as various
combinations of policies – such as social protection floors and activation strategies –
with a view to discerning whether they are potentially useful in protecting workers, while
pre-empting a wide range of problems caused by economic shocks. We have called this
feature proactivity. This is in contrast to reactive characteristics, which would relate to
interventions addressing a specific problem in the short term. Both types of features
are useful in the design of a balanced portfolio of labour market policies, but proactive
features are likely to be closer to the debates about the future of work. Moreover,
understanding the distinction between proactive and reactive characteristics of labour
market policies may add a useful tool to improve the design of these policies.
The paper argues that implementation appears to be crucial in enhancing the proactivity
of labour market policies. From an aggregate perspective, we have identified in the
empirical evidence two key implementation variables (Escudero, 2018): adequate
funding for the administrative management of ALMPs, and continuity of public spending
on these policies. These two dimensions of implementation increase the positive impact
of ALMPs, but also have proactive features as they allow these policies – and their
effects – to be sustainable over time. Considering the whole economy, tripartite social
dialogue seems an ideal instrument to find avenues to enhance the positive effects of
these implementation variables and proactive features. As Rychly (2009) remarks, the
great recession has led to a more proactive approach towards social dialogue, even
in countries with less dialogue-oriented public administrations. Therefore, the current
recovery period would be the appropriate time to use tripartite social dialogue with this
objective.
In addition, implementation appears also to be key in enhancing the proactivity of more
comprehensive policy approaches, such as those comprising a combination of policies.
In developing and emerging countries, the combination of policies has been a distinctive
characteristic of the development of social protection floors since the 1990s. The ILO
Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202) is an important part of this
“quiet revolution” in social protection in developing and emerging countries (Barrientos
and Hulme, 2009). These policies provide income support as an anti-poverty measure,
but also with a view to broadening the labour market opportunities of individuals through
the joint implementation of ALMPs. Impact evaluations show that these joint approaches
have generally positive results not only in terms of improving employment and earnings,
but also in terms of providing effective access to basic services such as health or child
education. Their proactive features are based on this joint implementation, because
it is this articulation of income support and ALMPs that improves the perspectives of
beneficiaries in the medium and long term.
In the case of developed countries, the combination of policies has been shaped by
the activation strategies mainly promoted by the OECD and the European Commission.
Activation strategies have linked passive policies with different ALMPs. As such, this

22

joint approach provides income support, but also greater opportunities for job access
and reskilling, among others. In other cases, they are also linked to training interventions
through market-based mechanisms (King and Barnow, 2009). In addition, the evidence
shows that these types of combined policies have larger impacts when caseworkers
intervene, which emphasizes the importance of labour market services for a successful
implementation of labour market policies. In fact, the main lesson from the activation
strategies is that the articulation of income support (passive) policies with ALMPs may
improve their medium- and long-term results, as in the case of employment incentives
when they are intermediated by caseworkers (Lombardi, Skans and Vikstrom, 2018).
The review of the evidence on the effectiveness of specific ALMPs has provided a more
detailed characterization of proactive and reactive features for each type of programme.
It is interesting that the proactive and reactive characteristics of each type of ALMP
varies between developed and developing and emerging countries. While training has
a clearer proactive feature for developed countries, this is not the case for developing
and emerging countries, mainly because in the latter countries the impacts of training
are short-lived – as shown by the evidence from Latin America and the Caribbean
(Escudero et al., 2017). Public works and direct job creation policies present proactive
features for all groups of countries, although they seem more meaningful for developing
and emerging countries as they are relevant for a greater share of the population. The
proactive feature is also clearer in developing and emerging countries given their explicit
anti-poverty objective of sustaining people’s incomes. Employment subsidies present
reactive features, as their effects are mainly short-lived, when they exist at all. This
reactive characteristic is especially suitable for low-wage older workers, for whom this
policy seems especially effective (Boockman and Brändle 2015; Huttunen et al 2013).
Self-employment and start-up programmes present clear proactive features. While these
policies improve and sustain earnings for the unemployed in all countries, in developing
and emerging countries they also collaborate to improve the earnings of informal workers
and their transition to formal employment. In addition, in emerging and developing
countries these policies are sometimes included in the development of social protection
floors. Finally, labour market services have proactive features, especially when they
are implemented jointly with other policies in developed countries. In developing and
emerging countries, the evidence is along the same lines, but as these policies must
rest on skilled caseworkers and counsellors, they are costly and not easy to implement
without additional and sustained financial support.
Finally, increasing resources to ALMPs would help to develop a balanced set of policies
with proactive and reactive features, especially in developing and emerging countries
and in the case of training. In this vein, Auer, Efendioglu and Leschke (2008) propose to
encourage donors to embrace the goals of ALMPs and align their funds for this purpose.
This is already a reality for graduation policies, for example, but stable funding beyond
isolated initiatives is necessary, especially in low-income countries. In this vein, it is
important to highlight again that funding stability during the business cycle increases
the aggregate effectiveness of ALMPs (Escudero, 2018) and is a key proactive feature
of ALMPs from an aggregate perspective. In fact, the lack of adequate and sustained
funding may even slow down the interesting evolution of social protection floors as
a combination of policies with an explicit anti-poverty objective, and with proactive
features at the same time.

23

References
Abebe, G.; Caria, S.; Fafchamps, M.; Falco, P.; Franklin, S.; Quinn, S. 2016. Anonymity or distance?
Experimental evidence on obstacles to youth employment opportunities, Working Paper (London,
Department for International Development).
Acemoglu, D.; Pischke, J. S. 1998. “Why do firms train? Theory and evidence”, in Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 113, No. 1, pp. 79−119.
Almeida, R.; Arbelaez, J.; Honorati, M.; Kuddo, A.; Lohmann, T.; Ovadiya, M.; Pop, L.; Sanchez Puerta,
M. L.; Weber, M. 2011. Improving employability and earning opportunities: The role of activation and
graduation programs, Social Protection and Labor Discussion Paper No. 1204 (Washington DC, World
Bank).
Andor, L.; Veselý, L. 2018. The EU’s Youth Guarantee: A broadly accepted reform in need of full
implementation, OSE Opinion Paper No. 19 (Brussels, Observatoire Social Européen).
Arni, P.; Lalive, R.; Van Ours, J. C. 2013. “How effective are unemployment benefit sanctions? Looking
beyond unemployment exit”, in Journal of Applied Economics, Vol. 28, No. 7, pp. 1153–1178.
Arranz, J. M.; García Serrano, C.; Hernanz, V. 2013. “Active labour market policies in Spain: A
macroeconomic evaluation”, in International Labour Review, Vol. 152, No. 2, pp. 327–348.
Auer, P.; Efendioglu, Ü.; Leschke, J. 2008. Active labour market policies around the world: Coping with
the consequences of globalization, 2nd edition (Geneva, International Labour Office).
Baker, D.; Glyn, A.; Howell, D. R.; Schmitt, J. 2005. “Labor market institutions and unemployment: A
critical assessment of the cross-country evidence” in D. R. Howell (ed.): Fighting unemployment: The
limits of free market orthodoxy (Oxford, Oxford University Press), pp. 72–118.
Banerjee, A.; Duflo, E.; Goldberg, N.; Karlan, D.; Osei, R.; Parienté, W.; Shapiro, J.; Thuysbaert, B.;
Udry, C. 2015. “A multifaceted program causes lasting progress for the very poor: Evidence from six
countries”, in Science, Vol. 348, No. 6236.
Barnow, B. S. 2009. “Vouchers in U.S. vocational training programs: An overview of what we have
learned”, in Journal for Labour Market Research, Vol. 42, No. 1, pp. 71–84.
Barrientos, A. 2011. “Social protection and poverty”, in International Journal of Social Welfare, Vol.
20, No. 3, pp. 240–249.
—; Hulme, D. 2009. “Social protection for the poor and the poorest in developing countries: Reflections
on a quiet revolution”, in Oxford Development Studies, Vol. 37, No. 4, pp. 439–456.
Bassanini, A.; Duval, R. 2009. “Unemployment, institutions, and reform complementarities: Reassessing the aggregate evidence for OECD countries”, in Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 25,
No. 1, pp. 40–59.
Baumgartner, H. J.; Caliendo, M. 2008. “Turning unemployment into self-employment: Effectiveness of
two start-up programmes”, in Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 70, No. 3, pp. 347–373.
Becker, G. S. 1964. Human capital (Chicago, University of Chicago Press).
Bellmann, L.; Jackman, R. 1996. “Aggregate impact analysis”, in G. Schmid, J. O’Reilly and K.
Schömann (eds.): International handbook of labour market policy and evaluation (Cheltenham, Edward
Elgar), pp. 143–162.
Bergemann, A. H.; van den Berg, G. J. 2008. “Active labor market policy effects for women in Europe:
A survey”, in Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, No. 91–92, pp. 385–408.
Betcherman, G.; Olivas, K.; Dar, A. 2004. Impacts of active labor market programs: New evidence from
evaluations with particular attention to developing and transition countries, Social Protection Discussion
Paper Series No. 0402 (Washington DC, World Bank).
Blanchard, O.; Wolfers, J. 2000. “The role of shocks and institutions in the rise of European
unemployment: The aggregate evidence”, in Economic Journal, Vol. 110, No. 461, pp. 1–33.
Bollens, J. 2011. Evaluating the mandatory activation of older unemployed, WSE Report 5-2011
(Leuven, Steunpunt Werk en Sociale Economie).

24

Bonoli, G. 2010. “The political economy of active labor-market policy”, in Politics & Society, Vol. 38,
No. 4, pp. 435–457.
Boockmann, B.; Brändle, T. 2015. Coaching, counseling, case-working: Do they help the older
unemployed out of benefit receipt and back into the labor market?, IZA Discussion Paper Series No.
8811 (Bonn, Institute for the Study of Labor
Bosch, G. 2011. “The German labour market after the financial crisis: Miracle or just a good
policy mix?”, in D. Vaughan-Whitehead (ed.): Work inequalities in the crisis. Evidence from Europe
(Cheltenham, Edward Elgar), pp. 243–275.
Bratti, M.; Ghirelli, C.; Havari, E.; Santangelo, G. 2018. Vocational training and labour market outcomes:
Evidence from Youth Guarantee in Latvia, European Commission Joint Research Centre (JRC) Working
Paper (Luxembourg, Publications Office of the European Union).
Bredgaard, T. 2017. “Employers and active labour market policies: Typologies and evidence”, in Social
Policy and Society, forthcoming.
Cahuc, P.; Carcillo, S. 2011. “Is short-time work a good method to keep unemployment down?”, in
Nordic Economic Policy Review, Vol, 1, No. 1, pp. 133–164.
Caliendo, M.; Künn, S. 2011. “Start-up subsidies for the unemployed: Long-term evidence and effect
heterogeneity”, in Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 95, No. 3–4, pp. 311–331.
—; —. 2014. “Regional effect heterogeneity of start-up subsidies for the unemployed”, in Regional
Studies, Vol. 48, No. 6, pp. 1108–1134.
Card, D.; Kluve, J.; Weber, A. 2010. “Active labour market policy evaluations: A meta-analysis”, in The
Economic Journal, Vol. 120, No. 548, pp. 452–477.
—; —; —. 2017. “What works: A meta-analysis of recent active labor market program evaluations”, in
Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.
Cazes, S.; Heuer, C.; Verick, S. 2011. “Labour market policies in times of crisis”, in I. Islam and S.
Verick (eds.): From the great recession to labour market recovery (London, Palgrave Macmillan), pp.
196–226.
Cho, Y.; Honorati, M. 2014. “Entrepreneurship programs in developing countries: A meta regression
analysis”, in Labour Economics, Vol. 28, pp. 110–130.
Cichon, M. 2014. The making or breaking of a UN social protection strategy: The post 2015 development
agenda, paper prepared for the UNRISD Conference on New Directions in Social Policy: Alternatives
from and for the Global South, 7–8 April 2014, Geneva, Switzerland (Geneva, United Nations Research
Institute for Social Development).
Crépon, B.; Duflo, E.; Gurgand, M.; Rathelot, R.; Zamora, P. 2013. “Do labor market policies have
displacement effects? Evidence from a clustered randomized experiment”, in Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 128, No. 2, pp. 531–580.
Eichorst, W.; Rinne, U. 2017. The European Youth Guarantee: A preliminary assessment and broader
conceptual implications, IZA Policy Paper No. 128 (Bonn, Institute for the Study of Labor).
Escudero, V. 2018. “Are active labour market policies effective in activating and integrating low-skilled
individuals? An international comparison”, in IZA Journal of Labor Policy, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 1–26.
—; López Mourelo, E. 2017. The European Youth Guarantee: A systematic review of its implementation
across countries, ILO Research Department Working Paper No. 21 (Geneva, International Labour
Office).
—; Kluve, J.; López Mourelo, E.; Pignatti, C. 2017. Active labour market programmes in Latin America
and the Caribbean: Evidence from a meta-analysis, ILO Research Department Working Paper No. 20
(Geneva, International Labour Office).
Esping-Andersen, G. 1990. The three worlds of welfare capitalism (Cambridge, UK, Polity Press).
Estevão, M. 2007. “Labor policies to raise employment”, in IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 54, No.1, pp.
113–138.
Eurofound. 2017. Employment effects of reduced non-wage labour costs (Luxembourg, Publications
Office of the European Union).

25

Gathmann, C.; Schönberg, U. 2010. “How general is human capital? A task-based approach”, in Journal
of Labor Economics, Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 1–49.
Grimm, M.; Paffhausen, A. L. 2105. “Do interventions targeted at micro-entrepreneurs and small
and medium-sized firms create jobs? A systematic review of the evidence for low and middle income
countries”, in Labour Economics, Vol. 32, pp. 67–85.
Halder, S. R.; Mosley, P. 2004. “Working with the ultra-poor: Learning from BRAC experiences”, in
Journal of International Development, Vol. 16, No. 3, 387-406.
Hämäläinen, K.; Hämäläinen, U.; Tuomala, J. 2018. “The evaluation of a Finnish youth guarantee:
Lessons for Europe”, in M. A. Malo and A. Moreno-Mínguez (eds.): European youth labour markets:
Problems and policies (Springer International), pp. 219–234.
Hardoy, I.; Roed, K.; von Simson, K.; Zhang, T. 2018. “Initiatives to combat the labour market exclusion
of youth in Northern Europe: A meta-analysis”, in M. A. Malo and A. Moreno-Mínguez (eds.): European
youth labour markets: Problems and policies (Springer International), pp. 235–251.
Hashemi, S.; Rosenberg, R. 2006. Graduating the poorest into microfinance: Linking safety nets and
financial services, CGAP Focus Note No. 34 (Washington DC, Consultative Group to Assist the Poor).
Heckman, J. J.; Smith, J. A. 1996. “Experimental and nonexperimental evaluation”, in G. Schmid,
J. O’Reilly and K. Schömann (eds.): International handbook of labour market policy and evaluation
(Cheltenham, Edward Elgar), pp. 37–88.
Hijzen, A.; Martin, S. 2013. “The role of short-time work schemes during the global financial crisis
and early recovery: A cross-country analysis”, in IZA Journal of Labor Policy, Vol. 2, No. 5, pp. 1−31.
Huttunen, K.; Pirttilä, J.; Uusitalo, R. 2013. “The employment effects of low-wage subsidies”, in
Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 97, Issue C, pp. 49–60.
ILO. 2010. Effects of non-contributory social transfers in developing countries: A compendium, Social
Security Department Working Paper (Geneva, International Labour Office).
—. 2013. “How to shift to a more equitable and job-friendly economic path”, World of Work 2013:
Repairing the economic and social fabric (Geneva, International Labour Office), pp. 101–116.
—. 2014. Portugal: Tackling the jobs crisis in Portugal, Studies in Growth with Equity Series (Geneva,
International Labour Office).
—. 2015. Inventory of labour market policy measures in the EU 2008–1: The crisis and beyond,
Synthesis Report (Geneva, International Labour Office).
—. 2016. What works: Active labour market policies in Latin America and the Caribbean, Studies of
Growth with Equity Series (Geneva, International Labour Office).
—. 2017. Independent evaluation of the ILO strategy and actions for creating and extending social
protection floors 2012–2017, Evaluation Office (Geneva, International Labour Office).
Immervoll, H.; Scarpetta, S. 2012. “Activation and employment support policies in OECD countries: An
overview of current approaches”, in IZA Journal of Labor Policy, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 1−20.
Islam, I.; Verick, S. 2011. “The great recession of 2008–09: Causes, consequences and policy
responses”, in I. Islam and S. Verick (eds.): From the great recession to labour market recovery (London,
Palgrave Macmillan), pp. 19–52.
Jensen, R. 2012. “Do labor market opportunities affect young women’s work and family decisions?
Experimental evidence from India”, in Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 127, No. 2, pp. 753–792.
Jespersen, S. T.; Munch, J. R.; Skipper, L. 2008. “Costs and benefits of Danish active labour market
programmes”, in Labour Economics, Vol. 15, pp. 859–84.
Kabeer, N.; Waddington, H. 2015. “Economic impacts of conditional cash transfer programmes: A
systematic review and meta-analysis”, in Journal of Development Effectiveness, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp.
290–303.
King, C. T.; Barnow, B. S. 2009. The use of market mechanisms in U.S. workforce programs: Lessons
for WIA reauthorization and the European Social Fund, paper presented to the Conference on What
the European Social Fund Can Learn from the WIA Experience, 7 November 2009, Washington DC.
Available at: http://umdcipe.org/conferences/WIAWashington/Papers/King-The_Use_of_Market_
Mechanisms_in_U.S._Workforce_Programs.pdf.

26

Klepinger, D. H.; Johnson, T. R.; Joesch, J. M. 2002. “Effects of unemployment insurance worksearch
requirements: The Maryland experiment”, in Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 56, No. 1,
pp. 3–22.
Kluve, J. 2010. “The effectiveness of European active labor market programs”, in Labour Economics
Vol. 17, No. 6, pp. 904–918.
—; Puerto, S.; Robalino, D.; Romero, J. M.; Rother, F.; Stöterau, J.; Weidenkaff, F.; Witte, M. 2016.
Do youth employment programs improve labor market outcomes? A systematic review, IZA Discussion
Paper No. 10263 (Bonn, Institute for the Study of Labor).
Knuth, M. 2014. 2014 German labour market outlook (Essen, Institut Arbeit und Qualifikation (IAQ),
Universität Duisburg-Essen). Available at: http://www.iaq.uni-due.de/aktuell/veroeff/2014/knuth01_
en.pdf.
Koning, J. de. 2001. “Aggregate impact analysis of active labour market policy: A literature review”, in
International Journal of Manpower, Vol. 22, No. 8, pp. 707–735.
—; Mosley, H. 2001. Labour market policy and unemployment: Impact and process evaluations in
selected European countries (Cheltenham, Edward Elgar)
Lazear, E. 2009. “Firm-specific human capital: A skill-weights approach”, in Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 117, No. 5, pp. 914–940.
Lombardi, S.; Skans, O. N.; Vikstrom, J. 2018. “Targeted wage subsidies and firm performance”, in
Labour Economics, forthcoming.
Macours, K.; Schady, N.; Vakis, R. 2012. “Cash transfers, behavioral changes, and cognitive
development in early childhood: Evidence from a randomized experiment”, in American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 247–273.
Martin, J. P. 2015. Activation and active labour market policies in OECD countries: Stylized facts and
evidence on their effectiveness, IZA Policy Paper No. 84 (Bonn, Institute for the Study of Labor).
Martínez, C.; Puentes, E.; Ruiz-Tagle, J. 2018. “The effects of micro-entrepreneurship on labor market
performance: Experimental evidence from Chile”, in American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 101–124.
Martins, P.; Costa, S. 2014. Reemployment and substitution effects from increased activation: Evidence
from times of crisis, IZA Discussion Paper No. 8600 (Bonn, Institute for the Study of Labor).
Mascherini, M. 2012. Youth guarantee: Experiences from Finland and Sweden (Dublin, European
Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions).
McKenzie, D. 2017. How effective are active labor market policies in developing countries? A critical
review of recent evidence, IZA Discussion Paper No. 10655 (Bonn, Institute for the Study of Labor).
Meyer, B. D. 1995. “Lessons from the US unemployment insurance experiments”, in Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 331, No. 1, pp. 91–131.
Michaelides M.; Benus J. 2012. “Are self-employment training programs effective? Evidence from
Project GATE”, in Labour Economics, Vol. 19, No. 5, pp. 695–705.
—; Mueser, P. 2017. Are reemployment services effective? Experimental evidence from the great
recession, Department of Economics Working Paper 06-15 (Nicosia, University of Cyprus). Available
at: http://papers.econ.ucy.ac.cy/RePEc/papers/06-15.pdf.
Murtin F.; de Serres A. 2014. “How do policies affect the exit rate out of unemployment? Disentangling
job creation from labour market frictions”, in Labour, Vol. 28, No. 2, pp. 190–208.
OECD. 1993. “Active labour market policies: Assessing macroeconomic and microeconomic effects”,
in Employment Outlook 1993 (Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), pp.
39–80.
—. 2013. “Activating jobseekers: Lessons from seven OECD countries”, in Employment Outlook 2013
(Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), pp. 127–190.
Robalino, D.; Walker, I.; L. Rawlings. 2011. Building social protection and labor systems: Concepts
and operational implications, Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper No. 1202 (Washington DC,
World Bank).

27

Rychly, L. 2009. Social dialogue in times of crisis: Finding better solutions, Industrial and Employment
Relations Department (DIALOGUE) Working Paper No. 1 (Geneva, International Labour Office).
—. 2011. “Coping with crises: Easing the burden of macroeconomic and structural adjustment through
social dialogue”, in I. Islam and S. Verick (eds.): From the great recession to labour market recovery
(London, Palgrave Macmillan), pp. 227–251.
Scarpetta, S. 1996. “Assessing the role of labour market policies and institutional settings on
unemployment: A cross-country study”, in OECD Economic Studies, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 43–98.
Schmid, J. 1996. “Process evaluation: Policy formation and implementation”, in G. Schmid, J. O’Reilly
and K. Schömann (eds.): International handbook of labour market policy and evaluation (Cheltenham,
Edward Elgar), pp. 198–231.
Thelen, K. 2014. Varieties of liberalization and the new politics of social solidarity (Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press).
Vaughan-Whitehead, D. 2011. “Introduction: Has the crisis exacerbated work inequalities?”, in D.
Vaughan-Whitehead (ed.): Work inequalities in the crisis: Evidence from Europe (Cheltenham, Edward
Elgar), pp. 1–37.
Vodopivec, M. 2013. “Introducing unemployment insurance to developing countries”, in IZA Journal of
Labor Policy, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 1–23.
Vooren, M.; Haelermans, C.; Groot, W.; van den Brink, H. M. 2018. “The effects of active labour market
policies: A meta-analysis”, in Journal of Economic Surveys, forthcoming.
Weishaupt, J. T. 2011. From the manpower revolution to the activation paradigm: Explaining institutional
continuity and change in an integrating Europe (Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Press).

28

