STUDY SUMMARY

The Impact of Unconditional Cash
Transfers on General Welfare in Kenya
Providing cash grants to low-income households without any strings attached has
been proven to have various benefits on the lives of those who receive the transfers,
but less is known about how this sudden influx of income affects the local economy
and people living nearby. In western Kenya, researchers evaluated the impact of
unconditional cash transfers, provided by the organization GiveDirectly, on household
well-being and local economic activity. The transfers led to large increases in
consumption and assets for recipients, as well as large positive impacts on
consumption for non-recipient households and revenue for firms. These results
counter concerns that large cash transfers may harm those who do not receive them.

Policy Issue
Previous research has found that providing unconditional cash
transfers, or cash grants without any strings attached, to low-income
households can led to positive welfare benefits for recipients,
including increased income, improved psychological wellbeing, and
greater empowerment for women.1 There is great interest in these

RESEARCHERS

implemented unconditional cash transfers as a tool for poverty

Dennis Egger, Johannes Haushofer,
Edward Miguel, Paul Niehaus, Michael
Walker

alleviation. Yet little is known about how the sudden influx of income

COUNTRY

from the transfers affects the local economy, including for those who

Kenya

do not receive the transfer. Does the injection of funds stimulate

PARTNER

types of programs, as many low- and middle-income countries have

wider economic activity or change the price of goods? Do the positive
impacts experienced by transfer recipients spill over to nonrecipients? Or alternatively, are there economic or psychological
consequences for non-recipients?

Evaluation Context
The NGO GiveDirectly, the implementing partner in this study,
provides large, unconditional cash transfers to poor households in
rural Kenya. While GiveDirectly has worked in Kenya since 2011, this
study occurred in areas where the NGO has not worked before: three
rural subcounties of Siaya County in western Kenya that border Lake
Victoria. Though rural, the area is relatively densely populated with
396 people per square kilometer compared to a national average of
91 people per square kilometer. The main national road runs through
this area, likely helping to integrate it into the national, regional, and
global economies.

GiveDirectly
PROGRAM AREA
Social Protection
TOPICS
Cash Transfers, Ultra Poor
TIMELINE
2014-2016

On average, villages in the study consisted of 100 households, and households composed of 4
members, including 2 children. Nearly all (97 percent) households were engaged in agriculture, with
some also engaging in wage work and self-employment (60 and 45 percent respectively).
In addition, Kenya offers a unique context to study the effects of cash transfers on local public finance.
It has a long history of local fundraising for public goods through meetings called harambees, which
may help facilitate the redistribution of income in villages.

Details of the Intervention
Researchers partnered with GiveDirectly to evaluate the impact of unconditional cash transfers on
household welfare, as well as on the local economy. GiveDirectly provided eligible households with a
series of three transfers totaling KES 87,000, or US$1,000 delivered through the mobile money
platform M-Pesa. To be eligible for the transfers, households had to live in a house with a grassthatched roof. The transfer amount was large, equivalent to 75 percent of recipient household’s
annual spending. This was also a large influx of cash to the local economy; the total amount
GiveDireclty distributed was roughly equivalent to 17 percent of annual Gross Domestic Products
(GDP) for areas receiving the transfers. This was a one-time program, as GiveDirectly did not provide
additional financial assistance to households after the final transfer.
In order to understand the transfer’s effects both within villages and on nearby villages, researchers
randomized on two levels. First, researchers randomly assigned groups of villages to either high or low
saturation status, which varied how many villages within the group received the treatment.
Researchers then randomly assigned villages to the treatment; two-thirds of villages in the highsaturation group compared to one-third of villages in the low-saturation group were assigned to the
treatment. All eligible households in treatment villages received the cash transfer. The remaining
villages formed the comparison group and no households in these villages received a transfer.
From mid-2014 to early 2017, the research team conducted four types of surveys on: household
financial, physical, and mental well-being, business performance, changes in market prices, and the
provision of local public goods. Household surveys occurred one to two months before the distribution
of any transfers and around eleven months after the last transfer. Similarly, researchers surveyed
business and enterprise owners at baseline and endline. Researchers also collected monthly data on
the prices of goods in local markets to assess if prices changed as an effect of the transfers.

Results and Policy Lessons
Overall, cash transfer recipients received and spent most of the transfer, leading to higher revenues
for local businesses. This rise in demand, in turn, also increased income for households who did not
receive the transfer, leading them to also spend more. These findings do not substantiate concerns
that large cash transfer may lead to adverse consequences on non-recipient households; rather there
were large positive effects for households both receiving and not receiving the transfer, as well on the
local economy.
Impacts on transfer recipients: Eighteen months after starting to receive transfers, households reported

higher expenditure and more durable assets than comparison households. The transfers likely
facilitated increased spending. Recipient households reported US$293 in purchasing power parity
(PPP) more in household spending than households eligible for the transfer (but did not receive) in
comparison villages, a 12 percent increase over US$2,537 PPP for comparison villages in the lowsaturation group. Likewise, assets increased by US$ 174 PPP from an average of US$724 PPP for
eligible households in the comparison group (a 24 percent increase). These results were consistent
with previous findings.
Impacts on the local economy: Businesses in both treatment and comparison villages experienced large
increases in revenue. From an average of US$758 PPP for comparison villages in the low saturation
group, revenues increased by US$348 PPP per household in treatment villages and by US$231 PPP in
comparison villages (a 46 and 30 percent increase, respectively) Gains in revenue were concentrated in
the retail and manufacturing sectors. Enterprises in areas that received more cash transfers
experienced meaningful gains in total revenues, in line with the increase in household expenditures.
Revenues increased without noticeable changes in firm’s investment behavior (beyond a modest
increase in inventories). These results suggest that increased demand induced by the transfers drove
expansion of enterprise activity rather than by increased investment.
Researchers found that the transfers led to a small increase in local prices for consumer goods.
Average price inflation was below 0.25 percent, and even during periods with the largest transfer
amount, estimated price effects were less than 1 percent. There is also some evidence that the
transfers led to higher wages: both households who received the transfer and those who did not
reported a higher hourly wage earned.
Impacts for non-recipients: Despite not receiving transfers, annual spending by non-recipient
households was 13 percent higher than the comparison group, an increase by US$ 334 PPP from
US$2,537 PPP. This gain was roughly the same as that experienced by households receiving the
transfer over the same 18-month period. Increased spending in non-recipient households was likely
due to more local firms’ owners and workers earning more income. Wage earnings increased by
US$182 PPP from an average of US$495 PPP for comparison households (a 37 percent increase).
Impacts on social well-being: Households receiving the transfer had higher levels of psychological wellbeing, food security, education, and security, as measured by an index of survey questions.
Furthermore, there were no negative effects for non-recipient households. Though there are concerns
about cash transfer programs doing harm to non-recipients, this was not the case in this setting. One
possible exception, however, is inequality: researchers estimated that the positive gains for nonrecipient households, especially wealthier ones, were so large that inequality within a village may have
slightly increased.
In sum, while there are concerns about the possibility of large-scale cash transfer programs leading to
adverse consequences for non-recipients, these findings counter those concerns. Non-recipient
households increased their spending and businesses in areas receiving the transfer experienced
higher revenue. Additionally, there was little to no price inflation and no negative effects in terms of
domestic violence, health, education, and the provision of local public goods.

Sources
1. Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2016. “The Short-Term Impact of Unconditional Cash
Transfers to the Poor: Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 131 (4):
1973–2042.

Innovations for Poverty Action
655 15th St. NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20005
+1 (202) 386-6200 | contact@poverty-action.org

poverty-action.org

