Policy Paper on Social Protection

Summary.................................................................................................................................... 2
1 Introduction ......................................................................................................................... 5
2 What do we mean by social protection?............................................................................. 8
3 Risk, vulnerability and pro-poor growth ............................................................................ 15
4 Choosing social protection instruments............................................................................ 23
5 Institutionalising social protection ..................................................................................... 35
6 Brief glossary .................................................................................................................... 43
7 References ....................................................................................................................... 44
8 Endnotes........................................................................................................................... 48

Final Draft September 2004
Note: This paper was produced for DFID, but does not represent DFID policy or the opinions of
DFID. Responsibility for the contents lies with the authors.

Andrew Shepherd, with Rachel Marcus, Armando Barrientos
Note: a number of ‘theme papers’ were also produced as part of this exercise: these are
listed at the end of the list of references.

Correspondence to:
Andrew Shepherd
ODI
111 Westminster Bridge Road
SE1 7JD
Email: a.shepherd@odi.org.uk

DFID paper on social protection

1

Summary
Social protection is an important dimension in the reduction of poverty and multidimensional deprivation. It is an approach towards thinking about the processes, policies
and interventions which respond to the economic, social, political and security risks and
constraints poor and vulnerable people face, and which will make them less insecure and
less poor, and more able to participate in economic growth. More narrowly, it describes a
set of policies that governments can pursue in order to provide protection both to the
‘active poor’, enabling them to participate more productively in economic activity, and to
the less active poor, with considerable benefits for society as a whole. Such policies can
help to fulfil states’ obligations to ensure basic rights for all individuals. Social protection
policies are always part of a broader set of policies – on macroeconomic stability,
enterprise and employment development, health, and education – aimed at reducing risk
and vulnerability and encouraging pro-poor growth.
A social protection approach can make a strong contribution, alongside other approaches,
both towards preventing the slide into poverty and assisting with recovery, and towards the
long-term reduction of poverty and multi-dimensional deprivation, as one way for
chronically poor people or their children to escape poverty. It can also contribute to the
achievement of human rights if states progressively take on as objectives of social
protection the obligation of ensuring that citizens have an adequate standard of living,
backed up by social security in case of loss of livelihood through disability, sickness, old
age or other causes.
This paper argues that well designed social protection can have a positive rather than a
restraining impact on economic growth (and therefore on the first MDG) and can help to
shape the pattern of economic growth in favour of the poor, such that the poor benefit at
least as much as, if not more than, the average (reflecting on the inequality indicator for
the first MDG). It states that social protection for the less active poor can be affordable
even in low-income countries, and that it has significant positive economic externalities.
The paper also argues that the difficulties for poor people in recovering from shocks purely
or largely through their own efforts, especially when shocks are multiple or sequenced,
should not be underestimated: recovery takes longer for the poor and usually benefits from
external help, whether from public policy or private support. Informal protection is
important and, where it is equitable in its burdens, should be facilitated.
The paper asks what is meant by social protection, clarifying its meaning, purpose and
scope within DFID’s approach to poverty reduction and programmes (Section 2). The
primary purpose of social protection has three parts:
to prevent, mitigate and enhance the ability to cope with and recover from the major
hazards faced by all poor people;
to contribute to chronically poor people’s ability to emerge from poverty, deprivation
and insecurity, and to challenge the oppressive socio-economic relationships which
could be keeping them poor, by increasing livelihood security and linking such
increases to the promotion of enhanced livelihoods; and
to enable the less active poor to live a dignified life with an adequate standard of
living, such that poverty is not passed from one generation to the next.
Social protection also supports economic growth, social integration and political stability,
human development, and human rights objectives.
The scope of this paper is broad, covering safety nets, social assistance and social
insurance, and mutual and informal risk management. The mechanisms range from pure
DFID paper on social protection

2

transfers to those without access to assets, including their own labour and social networks,
through transfers that require a reciprocal action from those able to provide it (e.g. labour
contributions or attendance at a public service), through to mutual insurance whereby the
entire cost of protection is met by the beneficiary.
Social protection should enable recovery from shocks; however, the effort required to help
poor people recover has often been underestimated, and recovery is therefore limited. In
order to enable more complete recovery, it is necessary (i) to use the development of a
social protection system to extend and systematise humanitarian approaches to recovery;
and (ii) to link protection with livelihood promotion, such that assets are safely
accumulated over time and vulnerability is reduced. These represent major challenges for
social protection approaches.
The developmental importance of social protection lies in its ability to interrupt the high
levels of risk and vulnerability which not only lead to people becoming poor, but also
contribute substantially to chronic poverty. This enables poor people to participate in and
contribute to economic growth (Section 3). Effective social protection can prevent the
negative consequences of uninsured risks: investment in liquid assets with lower returns
than other investments have; the accumulation of burdens of care for society’s carers,
usually women, the elderly and older children; irreversible losses of human capital through
malnutrition, preventable death, disability and illness.
A disaggregated analysis of vulnerability is necessary in an understanding of its varied
sources and degrees, with the end that an appropriate approach to dealing with risk and
vulnerability can be developed, and a range and combination of social protection policies
can be designed. Social protection can then relieve some of the market failures that
prevent or slow economic growth and prevent poor people from taking advantage of the
opportunities growth provides. It can also make strong contributions to the protection and
building of the human, financial, natural and physical assets of poor people which enable
them to grow out of poverty.
There is a battery of policy instruments that governments can use to advance the
protection available to the poor – not only in the contributions governments can make
directly to reducing risk and vulnerability, but also in regulation that should facilitate private
and informal social protection (Section 4). This paper argues that it is combinations of
instruments that will make a significant difference and offers a set of criteria by which
individual instruments can be judged in a particular vulnerability context. In most lowincome countries, some combination of strengthened safety nets, conditional transfers to
support human capital development, and basic social assistance measures will be the
most effective, given the poverty reduction objectives of government policies and donor
support. Countries develop unique social protection ‘trajectories’ over time, reflecting the
risk and vulnerability context and socio-political and economic history.
Targeting is often a less than ideal approach to providing protection: it is difficult to avoid
wrongful exclusion and inclusion, it is expensive and administratively difficult to do well,
and it reduces social solidarity. However, decision-makers will continue to insist on it,
largely on cost grounds. In this situation, the best targeting is the lightest – targeting can
be carried out where there are simple categories which make sense (age, location, widely
recognised degree of exclusion), within which provision ideally should be universal. As
administrative capacity evolves, more sophisticated approaches to targeting can be
undertaken.
Public social protection policies are affordable even in low-income countries, though they
become more so as economic development takes place and public revenues improve.
DFID paper on social protection

3

Although start-up costs may be high, these can be spread over a number of years, and
implementation be progressive. Whereas under project modes of donor financing, support
for long-term recurrent expenditure was difficult (and resisted), the increasing use of
budget support makes donor support to social protection more possible. The key issue is
agreement between donors and government on the uses of budget support; this may not
be straightforward, since there are often competing approaches to social protection and
contested priorities. Another significant challenge is developing a sufficiently long time
horizon for budget support to make it worthwhile a government embarking on particular
social protection policies. If this challenge is too great, it may be better to rely on other
capital-based financing mechanisms, such as the ILO’s Global Trust.
The institutionalisation of social protection does not happen automatically, and there are
key strategic decisions to be made (Section 5). Political leadership is critical, as is the
articulation of a constituency and the development of a policy legitimation process.
Bureaucratic leadership and coordination is also important, as a social protection approach
is best ‘mainstreamed’ across various areas of government business. The Poverty
Reduction Strategy Process allows a common policy analytical approach to issues of risk
and vulnerabilities, which policies and programmes in various sectors – especially the
social and productive sectors, and macroeconomic policy – can buy into. Which
departments or ministries would best coordinate the development of a social protection
approach is context specific. The corollary of a mainstreamed approach is that it would be
important to maintain key cross-cutting safety nets which guard against risks with which
protective policies in particular sectors are unable to deal.
Whatever public policy actions are taken, informal provision should always be explicitly
considered, with a view both to reducing the inequitable burdens this sometimes imposes
and to facilitating the useful mutual protection which is afforded poor people. Mechanisms
that strengthen the social networks on which mutuality depends can also contribute.
Where states are fiscally challenged and donors exercise significant policy influence,
differences of view between government and donors (or within government and among
donors) about the role, organisation and desirable strength of social protection may make
the policy dialogue difficult. It would be a mistake to attach too rapid timetables to such a
dialogue. For policies with long-term implications, it is important that strong national
ownership is there from the start.

DFID paper on social protection

4

1 Introduction
Social protection is an important dimension in the reduction of poverty and multidimensional deprivation. It is an approach towards thinking about the processes, policies
and interventions which respond to the economic, social, political and security risks and
constraints poor and vulnerable people face, and which will make them less insecure and
less poor, and more able to participate in economic growth.1 This is grounded in the view
that the limited capacity of households and communities to protect themselves against
contingencies threatening their consumption and investment plans (i.e. their vulnerability)
is a major factor explaining poverty and underdevelopment.
More narrowly, it also describes a set of policies which governments can pursue in order to
ensure protection both to the ‘economically active poor’, enabling them to participate more
productively in economic activity, and to the less active poor, with considerable benefits for
society as a whole. Such policies can help to fulfil states’ obligations to ensure basic rights
for all individuals. Social protection policies are always part of a broader set of policies –
on macroeconomic stability, enterprise and employment development, health and
education – aimed (partly) at reducing risk and vulnerability and encouraging pro-poor
growth.2
The poor and deprived are not a homogeneous group: among them are people who are
actively forging pathways out of poverty, but also people who have just become poor.
There are also people who are chronically poor, and who may pass their poverty on to the
next generation. Vulnerability to shocks both makes people poor in the first place, and
keeps them poor in the long run. The shocks poor people face can be economic, natural,
political, environmental, and health related. The deprivation that can follow from a shock or
a series of shocks can have many dimensions: economic, social and political.
A social protection approach can make a strong contribution, alongside other approaches,
both towards preventing the slide into poverty and assisting with recovery, and towards the
long-term reduction of poverty and multi-dimensional deprivation, as one way for
chronically poor people or their children to escape poverty.
Social protection is not the only approach to poverty reduction. It is always to be used in
combination with other approaches: the provision of social and economic services,
infrastructure development, and institutional development. It offers great potential to
include those otherwise excluded from the benefits of these other approaches; it can make
a fundamental difference to the sense of citizenship experienced by poor people.
It has been argued that the Millennium Development Goals cannot be achieved without
appropriate, well designed and cost-effective social protection mechanisms (Box 1).3
This paper argues that well designed social protection can have a positive rather than a
restraining impact on economic growth (and therefore on the first MDG) and can help to
shape the pattern of economic growth in favour of the poor, such that the poor benefit at
least as much as, if not more than, the average (reflecting on the inequality indicator for
the first MDG). It states that social protection for the less active poor can be affordable
even in low-income countries, and that it has significant positive economic externalities.
The paper also argues that the difficulties for poor people in recovering from shocks purely
or largely through their own efforts, especially when shocks are multiple or sequenced,
should not be underestimated: recovery takes longer for the poor and usually benefits from
external help whether, from public policy or private support. Informal protection is
important and, where it is equitable in its burdens, should be facilitated.
DFID paper on social protection

5

Box 1: ‘Without appropriate social protection mechanisms the MDG targets for 2015 will not be
achieved’
Social protection helps reduce both transient and chronic poverty; this could contribute to a 5–10% reduction
in overall income poverty incidence. In Kyrgyzstan, without social protection the extreme poverty headcount
would have increased by 24%, the poverty gap by 42%, and the severity of poverty by 57%. The vulnerability
of the chronically poor can also be reduced through health and education fee waivers, workfare schemes,
old-age pensions and other measures that enhance the assets of the poor. In Kyrgyzstan again, pensions
significantly reduced poverty headcounts. The poor can take greater risks if protected, leading to higher
incomes.
Reduced income poverty helps improve health and education outcomes. Incentives to keep children in
school and health insurance enable poor people to tide over the costs of dealing with shocks. Conditional
cash and food transfer programmes have good effects on school enrolment and attainment, child labour and
health and nutrition, and help households’ smooth consumption during crises. Public works improve the
supply of clinics and schools, and can contribute to substantial positive change in outcome indicators such
as infant mortality rates.
Several social protection instruments have positive effects on gender equality, with spin-off benefits for
households, and can also enhance women’s social capital. Labour market policies which narrow the gap
between men and women in terms of hiring conditions and wages through maternity/paternity leave,
affordable childcare, and policies against labour market discrimination, enable women to enter and stay in
the labour market and increase the demand for girls’ education.
Source: World Bank (2003).

1.1 Structure of the paper
The next section asks what is meant by social protection, clarifying its meaning, purpose
and scope within DFID’s approach to poverty reduction and programmes (Section 2).
Section 3 argues that vulnerabilities need to be understood in a disaggregated way, with
the end that an appropriate range and combination of social protection policies can be
designed. Social protection can then relieve some of the market failures that prevent or
slow economic growth and prevent poor people from taking advantage of the opportunities
growth provides. It also argues that social protection can make strong contributions to the
protection and building of the human, financial, natural and physical assets of poor people
which enable them to grow out of poverty.
There is in progress a discussion of the various policy instruments that governments can
use to advance the protection available to the poor – not only in the contributions
governments can make directly to reducing risk and vulnerability, but also in regulation that
should facilitate private and informal social protection (Section 4). This paper argues: that
social protection, like food security, cannot be confined to only one part of government: a
social protection approach can be ‘mainstreamed’ across a number of areas of
government business; that the Poverty Reduction Strategy process is well placed to
enable this to happen; and that social protection can be supported financially through
budget support or sector programming mechanisms, provided that the necessary
agreement on objectives and instrumentation has been reached between donors and
government. Other more innovative approaches may also have a role (Section 5).
Findings from thematic work on social protection and a number of themes (rights, basic
services, food security, gender, HIV/AIDS, conflict and post-conflict situations, as well as
pro-poor growth and financing social protection) are woven into this paper, and have
produced a number of critical arguments, for example:
Social protection is compatible with and strengthened by a rights-based approach to
development. The development of social protection policies also contributes to the
achievement of a number of rights. The relationship to a rights-based approach is
illustrated in Box 2.

DFID paper on social protection

6

Social protection and investment in basic services should not be an either/or choice;
it should be recognised that good human development outcomes for all can often
be promoted by a combination of the two.
Likewise, the relationship between social protection and economic growth does not
have to be seen as a trade-off: there are many ways in which reducing risk and
vulnerability increases investment and growth, complementarities which can be
maximised.
Significant social protection can cost less than 1% of GDP and have both short and
long-term benefits for the economy.
Social protection is capable of mitigating and assisting the coping strategies of
people facing a wide range of risks and vulnerabilities, including those deriving from
shocks as different as HIV/AIDS, food insecurity and conflict.
It is better to include people facing particular shocks (e.g. HIV/AIDS) as
beneficiaries of social protection in general, rather than narrowly target them.
Targeting the vulnerable with social protection programmes should not compromise
people’s ability to meet some of their own needs sustainably; however, it should
explicitly try to reduce inequitable burdens, shouldered by women in particular.
Addressing chronic food insecurity requires additional instruments to those which
deal with acute short-term crises, and may require modifying the latter as well; it is
important to address both forms of food insecurity. The same can be said for
chronic and acute vulnerability more generally.
As with food security, mainstreaming a social protection approach suggests that
departments of welfare might not always play the leading role in developing social
protection work in government. Even where they do, the multiple providers of social
protection need strong recognition in any strategy.
Box 2: Is there a human right to social protection?
The international human rights framework recognises the human right to ‘social security’ in the event of
unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood, with special care and
assistance for motherhood and childhood. This right, which has been codified in particular through the ILO’s
social security standards and in relation to income security, is, however, too narrow to encompass the full
range of issues related to risks and vulnerability to which social protection responds.
The full range of human rights is relevant for social protection. This starts with the ‘right to an adequate
standard of living’ (including food, clothing, housing, medical care, social services as well as social security)
but should be expanded to the full set of civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights. For example, the
right to be free from torture protects against state abuses that not only violate a person’s dignity but also
weaken livelihoods opportunities; also relevant are civil and political rights which are preconditions for rights
associated with livelihoods, such as the ability to form associations or take part in elections and to demand
social protection entitlements.
A rights-based approach to social protection?
A rights-based approach is normative and based on the international human rights framework, which
considers citizens as ‘rights-holders’ and states as ‘duty-bearers’. A number of human rights principles, such
as equality, non-discrimination, inclusion, participation and accountability, are derived from this framework.
Under a rights-based approach, states are obligated to provide laws, regulatory frameworks, programmes
and policies which will all enhance the ability of households to manage risks and improve their standard of
living. States should also respect human rights (i.e. not violate them directly) and provide protection from
violations by third parties. Minimum standards need to be provided, such as a basic form of education,
primary healthcare and basic foodstuff. Under this approach, citizens are empowered to take their own
decisions, mobilise, claim their rights and entitlements, and hold the state to account. Inclusion and
participation in decision-making processes are key. Under this approach, social protection is thus not just a
matter of charity or generosity, but also a basic responsibility of states.
For further discussion, see Piron (2004).
DFID paper on social protection

7

2 What do we mean by social protection?
Social protection is both an approach and a set of policies. As an approach, it focuses on
reducing risk and vulnerabilities, and includes ‘all interventions from public, private and
voluntary organisations and informal networks to support communities, households and
individuals in their efforts to prevent, manage and overcome risks and vulnerabilities’.4
Informal networks would include individuals transferring resources to friends and family.
The poorest households and communities face numerous sources of severe risk. Despite
their best efforts to protect themselves against these risks through mutual support and
informal insurance, the constraints they face in doing so leave them ‘vulnerable to long
term, irreversible losses of human capital’.5
A social protection approach is premised on achieving a degree of agreement across
society that citizens are entitled to certain minimum standards of welfare by virtue of their
citizenship. This is embodied in the internationally recognised ‘right to an adequate
standard of living’, as well as in a recognition that there is an obligation on states to
provide minimum standards in relation to economic and social rights (e.g. to health or
education). Social protection measures that promote and protect agreed minimum
standards can help realise other rights (for example, achieving a minimum level of
healthcare means that children can benefit more from education). The minimum standard
of living is usually a politically contested issue and evolves over time, along with
prosperity, education, communication and political ideology.
The social protection approach has been influenced by the World Bank and its Social Risk
Management (SRM) framework, which focuses on preventing, mitigating and coping with
risks and shocks, but which also aspires to provide pathways out of poverty.6 Actors
include individuals, households, communities, NGOs, market institutions, government,
international organisations, and the world community. Risk management arrangements
include the informal, market-based, and publicly provided or mandated.7 Risks are either
‘idiosyncratic’ (affecting individuals or households singly in time) or ‘co-variant’ (affecting
large numbers of households/individuals at the same time).
The major contributions of the SRM framework are, first, to have usefully shifted thinking
about livelihood security from a focus on post-crisis safety nets helping poor people to
cope, to ex ante prevention and mitigation measures across a potentially wide range of
public and private decisions and public policy instruments. This is the aspect of social
protection which makes it a developmental rather than humanitarian approach: in putting
measures in place before a crisis it creates the confidence that the crisis can be survived
without recourse to loss or erosion of livelihood or assets that are the basis for income and
enterprise. This entails the potential for behaviour change: greater productive investment
and risk-taking become possible. For example, poor people can decide to keep children in
school for longer, educate girls as well as boys, and invest in land development,
enterprise, and skills. Freed from the patron-client relationships that previously assured
security, they can also more easily find the social and political capital that enables rights to
be asserted. Social protection can also play the role of a ‘springboard’ out of poverty and
deprivation.
Secondly, the SRM framework has drawn attention to the fact that much social protection
is in fact provided by family, community, informal and not-for-profit organisations, as well
as, in some situations, the private sector: the state is not the only actor, even though it is
an important one. This raises challenging questions about not only whether and how
governments can avoid crowding out such initiatives, but also whether and how those
DFID paper on social protection

8

which are beneficial and equitable in their impact can be crowded in. It also risks diverting
attention from the key role that states and the international community must play in
meeting the obligations they have under international law (see Box 2 above).
There are two principal issues in addressing the risks faced by poor and vulnerable people
which are not well addressed by the SRM approach. First, the chronically poor (of whom
there are several hundreds of millions in the developing world),8 who suffer multiple and
sequenced shocks while they are poor and are usually least well equipped to deal with
them, may be left out of the picture or at least not sufficiently highlighted. Their continued
deprivation may be at least partly attributed to their high levels of vulnerability; chronic
poverty also leaves people extremely vulnerable.9 The consequences of chronic poverty
are potentially serious for economic growth prospects – the chronically poor will continue
to express low levels of demand for goods and services; they will not be able to take
advantage of economic and human development opportunities as these arise; and the
chronic poverty of marginal groups and regions may contribute to social and political
instability, which is also bad for economic growth.10 This has implications for both the
purpose and scope of social protection, discussed below.
A reason for this potential omission is that the SRM framework (and indeed many
governments and donor agencies) does not differentiate adequately between different
categories of poor and vulnerable people. It gives less weight to improving the life chances
of the chronically poor and, among them, the less active poor as compared with the
transitorily and more active poor, because these are not seen as potential contributors to a
positive growth process. Social protection needs to include measures that will increase the
chances that such individuals and households will be in a position to contribute positively
in future, otherwise its proponents could be accused of perpetuating poverty on a massive
scale. The need for a disaggregated analysis is returned to in Section 3.1.
Secondly, there is a presumption that risk prevention, mitigation and coping strategies will
be enough to enable full recovery from shocks or stresses; that poor people will ‘bounce
back’ to where they were before, or a better place. Empirically,11 and theoretically, this is
not always the case. Recovery and new opportunities may require access to scarce
resources. The process of recovery needs at least to be problematised, rather than
assumed away, or assumed to have been dealt with by ‘development’ – there is a
substantial risk of non-recovery which also needs to be managed and overcome. This is
particularly important for the development of more and stronger pathways out of poverty.
For example, if poor people, post-crisis, simply return to rely on the same patronage
relationships for security which previously ensured that they were ‘safe but poor’,12 this
could hinder a substantial recovery: the springboard effect of social protection will be
limited. Where the risk of non-recovery is widespread, a good understanding of the
reasons will be needed in order to design a laddered, incremental approach to supported
recovery which will make a reality of the ‘springboard’ effect.
In the case of chronic conflicts, people are likely to have to adapt to changed circumstance
rather than recover in any absolute sense (Box 3). This offers social protection strategists
a deep challenge.

DFID paper on social protection

9

Box 3: Dealing with the risk of non-recovery from conflict, with reference to Afghanistan
In the immediate aftermath of war, particular groups may be especially vulnerable – refugees or internally
displaced, widows, orphans, disabled, and ex-combatants, and short-term assistance may be targeted at
them. It is noteworthy that these are similar to the most ‘vulnerable groups’ in other crisis situations – and the
groups to which social assistance efforts are often channelled, where these exist. This suggests that
societies which already have social assistance policies will be better able to deal with the impoverishing
consequences of conflict and with rehabilitation in its aftermath. Short-term assistance may not be enough,
however: for example, ex-combatants and displaced people may require sustained support over a period of
years, depending on experience, resources and the environment to which they return.
There may be an opportunity in the aftermath of war to redistribute assets – land, educational opportunities –
in favour of disadvantaged groups. There may also be opportunities to link social protection (e.g. conditional
transfers) to the restoration of basic services, to ensure these include the vulnerable and impoverished. More
broadly, the development of social protection in a country like Afghanistan ‘provides an agenda for making a
smooth transition from the chaotic and haphazard collection of humanitarian projects to a more reliable and
regularised system that protects the population as a whole’, and by moving the centre of activity to the
government, strengthens the legitimacy of the state ‘by allowing it to re-shoulder its responsibilities for
ensuring the basic survival of its citizens’. Since Afghanistan is highly prone to natural disasters, it also
needs a system to respond to these; increased livelihood security may provide the conditions needed to
draw opium producers to alternative livelihoods. However, social protection in Afghanistan will also need to
confront the structural asset deficit faced by very large numbers of people for years to come. All of this will
take a long time, as the capacity of the public sector is so low. It would be important in this situation not to
abandon humanitarian relief programmes before alternative livelihood security measures were in place.
These could rather be integrated into an overall social protection strategy.
Source: based on Darcy (2004) and Christoplos (2004).

Social insecurity in extreme circumstances has impoverishing effects, and societies in
turmoil are in a weak position to rebuild the basic social fabric of relationships and a
minimum level of trust. These situations stretch the concept of social protection beyond the
narrow purpose of dealing with risks and vulnerabilities in an even more extended way
than famine or epidemic conditions induced by natural hazards. Where the state is hostile,
a critical part of the problem, obligations which would normally rest with it arguably should
be temporarily transferred to the international community. This is because the solidarity on
the basis of which responsibility for basic welfare is distributed has broken down. A
question for this paper is the extent to which international practice on social protection
should stretch to encompass this terrain. There are universal rights which suggest that it
should:
The right to life
‘The right of everyone to an adequate standard of living…including adequate food,
clothing, housing…’
‘The right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health…’13
Protracted violent conflict may create a vacuum in terms of implementing such rights. In
practice, the burden will be taken by informal and private mechanisms, and support to
these may be the most practical approach the international community can take. There are
also protective rules of international humanitarian law in place which prevent starvation
being used as a method of war and the destruction of crops, livestock, drinking water
sources, essential medical supplies and other ‘objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population’.14

DFID paper on social protection

10

The obligation progressively to achieve these rights lies primarily with the state. But there
are practical difficulties in enforcing or implementing such rights in situations of violent
conflict.
2.1 The purpose of social protection
Based on the above discussion, we can distinguish primary and related purposes for social
protection. Its primary purpose has three parts:
to prevent, mitigate and enhance the ability to cope with and recover from the major
hazards faced particularly by all poor people;
to contribute to chronically poor people’s ability to emerge from poverty, deprivation
and insecurity and to challenge the oppressive socio-economic relationships which
could be keeping them poor, by increasing livelihood security and linking such
increases to promoting enhanced livelihoods; and
to enable the less active poor to live a dignified life with an adequate standard of
living, such that poverty is not passed from one generation to the next.15
Households and communities have institutions and practices that are consistent with risk
management strategies. Any interventions by governments (or donors) act on systems of
risk management that exist already, not in a vacuum. The objective of such interventions
should therefore be to support functional behaviour and institutions and weaken
dysfunctional behaviour and opportunities.
These ideas represent the primary purpose, but they can feed a number of other important
objectives which can be explicitly included in social protection policies. Economic growth
can be enhanced, especially the extent to which it benefits the poor. Social protection can
make the process of economic improvement ‘socially bearable’ by mitigating its negative
aspects. An environment can be created in which recovery from shocks is feasible for the
poor. Poor people can be enabled to become more assertive in claiming their rights and
entitlements, without fear of loss of security. Social protection can explicitly help to protect
against discrimination – in the job and other markets, and in living arrangements more
generally. Social and political stability and the legitimacy of a state can be enhanced
through social protection measures which strengthen the social contract between state
and citizen.
2.2 The scope of social protection
The social protection menu is a long one, in terms of what is provided, by whom and to
whom. There are many choices to be made along the way (discussed in Sections 4 and 5).
A social protection approach goes well beyond well established concepts of safety nets
(Box 4), social insurance and social assistance (Box 5), as it suggests a reconsideration of
a range of public policies and societal processes from the perspective of risk and
vulnerability. Before developing public policy responses, a true social protection approach
would take very seriously the need to understand households’ and communities’ own
institutions and practices that contribute to protection. There is usually a gaping hole in
countries’ understanding of these ‘informal’ aspects of social protection, one which needs
to be filled in order to design policies which genuinely complement, or knowingly and for
good reason ‘crowd out’.

DFID paper on social protection

11

Box 4: Social protection and safety nets
Safety nets are put in place to prevent individuals from falling below a given standard of living, and are
usually short-term emergency measures. Social protection supports households in reducing, preventing and
overcoming hazards which adversely affect wellbeing, consumption and investments. Safety nets were
advocated as responses to financial crises and adjustment. Social protection thinking developed as a result
of the failure of safety nets – they worked imperfectly, did not fully reach intended target groups, and could
not be set in place fast enough. Social protection is, by contrast, in place before the crisis arrives. Well
designed safety nets can, however, be an important part of a social protection approach, if their existence is
well known before the crisis hits.
Box 5: Social protection and social security
It is useful to distinguish social security, as a subset of social protection. Social security is ‘the protection
which society provides for its members through a series of public measures: to offset the absence or
substantial reduction of income from work resulting from various contingencies (notably sickness, maternity,
employment injury, unemployment, invalidity, old age and death of the breadwinner); to provide people with
healthcare; and to provide benefits for families with children’.16 Social security systems are based around
formal employment, and include social insurance and social assistance measures.
The principal debate in developing countries has been how to extend coverage of formal social security to
the large numbers of self-employed outside the formal sector. Social insurance and social assistance against
unemployment represent traditional security mechanisms that are not applicable to the bulk of the poor in
developing countries who work in the informal sector. There are no short cuts to including the majority of
workers in such schemes: sustained economic growth which expands the formally employed workforce, and
creates the revenue base for redistributive social protection, is the long-run answer. The informal sector is
progressively brought under the umbrella of publicly provided or guaranteed social protection in this vision.
Under its ‘Decent Work’ agenda, the ILO has proposed the following roles for social protection: combating
the impact of poor health, particularly HIV/AIDS, on employment and incomes; priority financing of
healthcare, including extending insurance to poor and vulnerable people; income support systems for
families with school-age children, the elderly and people with disabilities; reform of existing social insurance
schemes with a view to a medium-term strategy for extension of coverage and synergy with small-scale
schemes; improvement of mechanisms for establishing and enforcing minimum wages; occupational health
and safety policies, with particular focus on hazardous occupations, such as agriculture, construction, mining
and small-scale manufacturing; community maternal support.17

In addition, having recognised that in poor countries much protection against risk is
privately and informally provided, social protection approaches have a duty to consider
how the beneficial aspects of these can be facilitated and enhanced, and the inequitable or
negative aspects diminished. The regulation of informal and private provision is thus a
serious dimension of a social protection approach. This will involve first assessing what
informally or privately provided protection has net benefits, with a view to ‘crowding them
in’. Informal and community-level provision is generally better at dealing with idiosyncratic
risk; the community ‘moral economy’ is less effective at a time when everyone is hit by a
crisis. On the other hand, protection provided by other poor people, at great cost to
themselves and sometimes to the social fabric, and by patrons intending to render clients
dependent and therefore unable to make useful investments for themselves or their
families, can be ‘crowded out’.
Strong efforts can also be made to link livelihood protection with promotion in order to
assist the active but chronically poor away from continued dependence either purely on
safety nets or on the patronage relationships which limit investment and growth.
Furthermore, a social protection approach can be included in mainstream economic and
social policies, such that these also contribute to reducing risk and vulnerability,
developing agreed minimum standards for an adequate quality of life, and providing the
basis on which escape from chronic poverty becomes possible.

DFID paper on social protection

12

2.2.1 The range of measures
The range of activities is well represented in the World Development Report 2000/1,18 and
reproduced, with an additional row, in Table 1. The major instruments of social protection
are assessed further in Section 4. These range from pure transfers to those without
access to assets, including their own labour and social networks, through transfers which
require a reciprocal action from those able to provide it (labour contributions, attendance at
a public service), through to mutual insurance whereby the entire cost of protection is met
by the beneficiary.
The addition of addressing the risk of non-recovery (row 5), the challenge of reaching the
poorest, and the importance of informal provision may suggest additional instruments.
Social protection as a policy framework involves finding and implementing an appropriate
mix of activities that could support communities, households and individuals in achieving
secure livelihoods.
The additional focus on recovery, building on humanitarian action (see Box 3 above) as
well as development programming, helps to deal with the ‘Catch 22’ of social protection:
that those countries whose people are most in need of social protection have the least
ability to provide it.19 Very low incomes, an absence of a strong economic growth path,
scarce public revenues, and a strong subsistence sector, all constrain poor countries from
establishing effective safety nets and social security systems.20 Where humanitarian action
in such a situation is ad hoc, the development of a social protection system provides an
opportunity to transform haphazard safety net programmes into a nationwide system to aid
poor people’s recovery. Where the condition of the state may still be part of the reason for
poor people’s vulnerability, partnerships between humanitarian organisations and parts of
the state designated to take up the social protection mandate could ensure a degree of
accountability to ordinary people, if the process is designed with accountability in mind.
Part of the recovery process is the re-establishment of social integration and the legitimacy
of the state; accountable social protection measures can contribute to this.21
Full recovery also requires strengthening the link between protecting and promoting
livelihoods. Social protection measures which smooth and increase income can in practice
enhance the asset position of poor households if households save and invest (as they
often do!)22 part of this income. Measures to restore assets ideally need to be
accompanied by new financial institutional structures which can prevent asset loss or
mortgaging in a crisis. Legal reforms can also contribute to reducing vulnerability, by
granting better access to common property resources, and granting rights and
strengthening the mechanisms to claim rights. This sort of combination of policies would
help to transform livelihoods, enabling vulnerable households to adopt medium and longterm actions (like investment in education) to ensure they overcome structural constraints
and limitations. Social protection can facilitate change and promote more extended
horizons.
The concern to crowd in equitable informal or private provision, and crowd out excessively
burdensome provision means that regulation will become a key policy function. Given the
liberalisation of insurance markets in many countries, regulatory structures are necessary
in any case, and in many cases are being put in place. Few, if any, have the capacity to
assess and deal with informal provision, however. This requires considerable institutional
development. It is very likely that NGOs will continue to be the best vehicle for
understanding and working out the ways in which to support and strengthen equitable
informal provision.
Thus, a social protection approach to risk and vulnerability goes well beyond safety nets
and social security, even if these provide a menu of public actions which may be
appropriate.
DFID paper on social protection

13

Table 1 Mechanisms for managing risks
Objective

Informal mechanisms
Individual and household

Formal mechanisms
Group-based

Market-based

Reducing risk

Preventive health practices
Migration
More secure income sources

Collective action for
infrastructure, dikes,
terraces
Common property
resource management

Mitigating risk:
Diversification

Crop and plot diversification
Income source diversification
Investment in physical and
human capital
Marriage and extended
family
Sharecropper tenancy
Buffer crops

Occupational
associations
Rotating saving and
credit associations

Saving accounts in
financial institutions
Microfinance

Investment in social
capital (ritual, reciprocal
gift giving)

Old age annuities
Accident, disability and
other insurance

Transfer from networks of
mutual support

Sales of financial
assets
Loan from financial
institutions

Insurance payments for
lost assets (mitigation)
Inclusion of losers in
collective arrangements
(e.g. savings groups)
Creation of losers’ groups

Asset replacement
loan schemes
Labour market and
other ‘opportunity’
information
Financial support to
market intermediaries

Mitigating risk: insurance

Coping with shocks

Recovering from
shocks/reducing the risk
of non-recovery

DFID paper on social protection

Sale of assets
Loans from money-lenders
Child labour
Reduced food consumption
Seasonal or temporary
migration
Saving assets (at the
expense of consumption)
Increasing recourse to limited
known strategies, which
become overcrowded

14

Publicly provided
Sound macroeconomic policy
Environmental policy
Educational and training policy
Public health policy
Infrastructure (dams, roads)
Active labour market policy
Agricultural extension
Liberalised trade
Protection of property rights
Pension system
Mandate
Insurance for unemployment
Illness, disability and other risks
Social assistance
Workfare
Subsidies
Social funds
Cash transfer
Incentive support to group or
market-based recovery
Additional support to schools to
keep children to a minimum useful
threshold
Focus infrastructure improvements
on affected regions and local areas
Increase coverage of social
security schemes to include nonrecoverers

3 Risk, vulnerability and pro-poor growth
Exposure to uninsured risks can create poverty traps: households are prevented from
taking reasonable risks, and engage in low-risk, low-return activities, keeping a stock of
liquid but not necessarily very productive assets which can be sold off in emergency. They
are constrained in the risks they take and from investing in a full range of assets because
of market failure in credit and insurance markets. The poor then have low levels of assets,
and those assets generate low returns. Continued exposure to high levels of risk can
induce chronic poverty. Social protection can change the perception of risk by poor people,
such that they invest in riskier, higher return activities, accumulate diversified portfolios of
assets, and put some of them to higher return uses. Income growth becomes possible for
swathes of people for whom it was previously unlikely. Social protection can also provide
poor people with the environment in which they can accumulate assets which can lead to
future income growth.
3.1

Analysing risk and vulnerability

3.1.1 The consequences of uninsured risk
Risks reduce income growth, by reducing investment and tying up resources in coping and
survival strategies. There are long-term impacts: recovery from shock may be slow.23 A
malnourished child has little chance of catching up, and the loss of human capital may
lead to significantly lowered lifetime income. Conversely, higher levels of human and other
assets contribute to higher rates of economic growth. In low-income countries some of the
costs are born by local NGOs and faith groups, the state or the international community,
usually inadequately. Most of the costs of coping with risk and the consequences of
shocks are born by poor households themselves and, within them, by the ‘carers’ –
women, the elderly, and older children in particular. This has consequences for
intergenerational poverty as well as for these individuals and their dependents.
Adjusting asset portfolios to cope with risk often means investing in liquid assets with lower
returns. Social protection may prevent this. Adjustment strategies are not generally able to
cope with serious and repeated shocks, especially co-variant. Effective ex ante social
protection can reduce the likelihood of co-variant shocks leading to huge asset loss.
Box 6: The welfare costs of ineffective risk management
‘The consequence of the failure of the diverse risk management strategies is a massive loss of welfare. In
Ethiopia this occurs in a number of ways. The most visible form is large scale physical death. Lives lost to
drought have been tragically high, especially in the past. HIV/AIDS killed hundreds of thousands to date and
this is expected to continue. The same is true for malaria…The losses do not end there. Income losses have
been staggering…droughts can shrink household farm production by up to 90% of output in a normal year.
Households are willing to pay up to 30% of their farm income to prevent malaria for one year, which gives
one an idea of the economic cost of malaria [for] farm households. Reduced income in turn leads to lower
consumption. For instance, a 10% reduction in income reduces consumption by 15%. A decrease in rainfall
by 10% can lead to up to 10% loss in consumption. For a single household, even a single experience of one
of these shocks would be unbearable. But when they are bunched together, as is often the case, the scale of
the problem becomes magnified.’
Source: World Bank (2003b: 8).

15

3.1.2 Disaggregating risk and vulnerability
Social protection focuses on the vulnerable, and the way in which ‘vulnerability’ is
constructed is a crucial determinant of who benefits. This would include those who are
vulnerable to absolute poverty as well as those who are already poor. In Indonesia, the
US$2 a day poor tended to be vulnerable to absolute poverty.24 In other situations, 150%
of the poverty line is sometimes taken. Vulnerability can be identified by other means:
people are vulnerable at certain points in their life cycle: in old age; in childhood; in
pregnancy. We know that these vulnerabilities to a degree cut across income poverty
levels. Focusing social protection on the vulnerable US$1–2 a day poor and the multidimensionally vulnerable has the advantage that a substantial proportion of the population
of most developing countries would be included. This makes social protection policies
politically more sustainable, and would widen their potential impact.
However, this raises the issue of whether the already poor do or can benefit from social
protection. And, in a situation where financial and human resources are severely
constrained, difficult choices about priorities will have to be made. This is the major
challenge for social protection.
Risks and vulnerabilities among the poor vary significantly. Those faced by the
economically active can be distinguished from those faced by the less active or inactive.
Different approaches will be necessary within an overall commitment to reducing
vulnerability for poor people.
It is sometimes thought more cost-effective to focus first on the transitorily poor, who can
more easily ‘bounce back’ to non-poor status through their own actions, with minimal
support. The chronically poor, by contrast, need asset transfers if they are to climb out of
poverty. These are political choices, the outcomes of which will vary from one context to
another. The Social Risk Management framework recognises that the ‘already poor’ also
experience risks, and need protecting against those risks.25 However, the framework
needs extending and adapting if it is really going to be able to focus on the risks and
vulnerabilities of this group as much as those of the transitorily poor and non-poor.
Box 7: Risk management objectives for the very poor, the poor and the non-poor
Risk management objective 1: minimise the size of the maximum possible welfare loss. Especially relevant
for the very poor since maximum loss is destitution or death.
Risk management objective 2: minimise the probability of a loss in consumption below a certain threshold.
Relevant for individuals around the poverty line.
Risk management objective 3: maximise the expected rate of return given a level of variability of returns. The
risk here is not poverty or destitution, but not making the most of the resources available, because of
inadequate information about risks.
Source: Siegel and Alwang (1999).

There are three categories of risk management objective, relevant respectively for the very
poor and vulnerable, for those around the poverty line, and for the non-poor (Box 7). This
allows appropriate responses to be designed: the poorest require measures which
minimise the maximum possible welfare loss: for example, healthcare, food distribution,
and asset insurance (including life, accident). Minimising the probability of falling below a
consumption threshold (e.g. the poverty line) suggests consumption smoothing via saving
and ‘dis-saving’, or insurance instruments. For higher income groups, portfolio
diversification and insurance would help prevent significant fluctuations in returns.26

16

Risk is a major factor in maintaining people in poverty over long periods, as well as
generating it.27 The likelihood is that many chronically poor people will not escape poverty
without significantly enhanced livelihood security. The evidence is that social protection
can address the needs of the chronically poor,28 and that carefully designed programmes
can help the poor onto an accumulative trajectory (e.g. Hulme and Matin, 2003).29
Vulnerability and risks vary within the life cycle and by gender: it is important that social
protection policies and programmes recognise and address these variations. As a result,
individuals within households may be appropriate units of analysis for social protection
strategies, especially if the objective is to operationalise the ‘springboard’ effect of social
protection. Children, women and the disabled may need protection against particular risks
which may otherwise reduce wellbeing, render them destitute, or contribute to mortality.
And protecting them, especially through education and nutrition, has many spin-off
benefits for their dependents and wider households, which can contribute to interrupting
intergenerational poverty.
Women are subject to general risks, which may be intensified by gender considerations –
for example the discrimination that women experience in labour markets and institutions
may be enough to account for the slower recovery which women-headed households may
experience after a shock.30 Women are more sensitive to changes in income, prices and
labour demand than men in some situations. This means that women could require greater
social protection to achieve the same outcome.31
Women are also subject to gender-specific risks which result from their biological roles in
reproduction, and from socially ascribed caring and other roles. Specific risks also arise
from restrictions on public role and taboos against women or men carrying out certain
tasks. Many of these are ‘life-cycle’ risks, which can be predicted: girl children are at risk of
not attending school because of domestic or income-earning responsibilities and are
particularly at risk of withdrawal as adolescents; unmarried women often have restricted
access to the labour market and both they and married women may be subject to sexual
harassment at work; adult and older women may have to bear much of the cost of disease
and death in the family, and may lose work because of caring responsibilities; divorce and
widowhood may bring stigma and loss of assets.32 Box 8 explores the implications.
Social protection arrangements do have the potential to enhance the scope for including
excluded groups into the mainstream. However, a big caveat is that households and
communities are the basic units active in social protection. Within households, resources
are distributed and redistributed according to norms and rational calculation. Attempting to
target individuals within households can only be approximate, as those individuals or
others in the household with decision-making power will often determine how those
resources are used and by whom. This may in some cases even stigmatise the individual,
and result in reduced welfare. Although it helps to have a disaggregated understanding of
risk and vulnerability, it does not immediately follow that a disaggregated (or targeted)
policy response is appropriate.

17

Box 8: Addressing the particular risks to which women are exposed
Men and women may be exposed to different risks; they may also experience the same risk differently.
Women are biologically more susceptible to some diseases (HIV, STDs) and suffer high maternal mortality.
They are also at risk of domestic violence, which may be socially accepted. Gender roles and patterns of
resource ownership and control constrain responses to risk and vulnerability. Property rights, norms about
mobility, freedom to remarry are examples of gendered dimensions of socio-economic life which constrain
men and women differently in their responses to risk. There are many specific risks linked to women’s life
cycles. However, social protection approaches generally deal poorly with these specific risks.
Women are rarely well protected by property laws, and where there is progress (e.g. Uganda), the judicial
mechanisms to implement women’s rights are often inadequate or biased against their interests.33 Maternity
benefits and childcare provision have potential but rarely receive priority. The provision of mobile crèches at
migrant construction worksites in Mumbai by a voluntary agency is an exception. The Maharashtra
Employment Guarantee Scheme has also provided crèches facilitating participation by mothers. Other public
social protection mechanisms which are likely to benefit poor women include: pensions, perhaps targeted at
the over 75s and widows; childcare facilities and allowances; and conditional transfers to keep girls in
school. Other policies with critical protective elements include legal reforms, and effective protection of
legally sanctioned property and individual security.
Women are often very vulnerable at work. It is difficult to extend formal social insurance to cover the informal
sector where most poor women work. However, SEWA in India illustrates what is possible when the
gendered nature of risk is understood: a health insurance scheme with support from government and the
private sector, relying on the mutual trust among SEWA members as collateral; maternity benefits against a
fixed deposit plan with premiums and payment structure designed to suit different income groups among the
poor; and the basic banking services providing savings accounts and credit.
Women are heavily involved in informal strategies for managing risks. These include strong informal
associations around common property resource management and collective work, savings and credit,
reciprocal gift-giving and intra-community transfers, and borrowing. Finding ways of strengthening the
informal sector represents uncharted territory: no government or development agency has done it; no
research on informal protection has been carried out with this question in mind. Neither has any assessment
been made of the displacement effects formal provision may have on the informal, and what of this may
represent desirable burden reduction as opposed to undesirable crowding out.
Source: based on Luttrell and Moser (2004).

Risk and Vulnerability Assessment
Decision-makers need to ask the following questions:
What are the main hazards to which poor people are most vulnerable? And which
people are vulnerable to which hazards?
What combination of instruments will best protect them against the major hazards?
A Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (RVA) should give answers to these questions.
Institutionalising such assessments in policy analysis and as part of the evidence base for
policy is critical. The second question can be answered in two stages: first, by assessing
what is known about the effectiveness and impact of individual instruments in a particular
country (or in similar contexts, if no information is available on a country) – see section 4;
and secondly by mapping feasible and (potentially) effective instruments against the major
hazards faced by the poor. The second step should generate appropriate combinations.
This exercise would help to identify priority gaps in the coverage of risks. For example, in
Bolivia, a vulnerability assessment which identified illness and injury, old age and
disability, and domestic violence as the major idiosyncratic risks, and harvest failure and
food price fluctuations, unemployment, precarious informal sector enterprises, and the
eradication of coca as the main co-variant risks, the following gaps in provision were
identified:
Education was not included in the Bolivian (or the World Bank’s) approach to social
protection; arguably this should appear strongly in the risk reduction category,
18

‘since it provides opportunities for livelihood security’. Education does now figure
strongly in this category through conditional cash transfer programmes, which
provide additional cash or food incentives to persuade parents and children of the
value of remaining in school through adversity and poverty.
Informal provision has not been assessed for its scope, coverage or impact. This
needs to be done before strategies to strengthen provision are developed.34
The Ethiopian Risk and Vulnerability Assessment identified limitations of existing public
risk management programmes. Risk mitigation strategies (irrigation, water harvesting,
agro-ecological packages and resettlement) all contributed to food security but introduced
their own risks in health, environment and conflict, which were not addressed. Even if well
implemented, they would also assist only a fraction of the vulnerable or extremely poor.
Existing risk coping strategies have a narrow focus on drought and food insecurity. Other
risks, such as malaria, HIV/AIDS and malnutrition – which are just as powerful drivers of
poverty as droughts – remained unaddressed. The food security programme also has a
narrow geographical coverage, hard choices having been made, and is overwhelmingly
designed and seen as useful only for relief, not for protecting and building assets. This
analysis provided the basis for a policy dialogue.
Hazards and vulnerability are context specific. Social protection responses need to be
similarly problem-based. There is little mileage in advocating universal magic bullets. At
the very least, a menu of options is needed, from which the ‘best’ can be chosen –
depending on objectives (see Section 4).
3.2 Social protection and growth
Growth usually benefits the poor, but can benefit them disproportionately if there is broad
access to assets and markets, and if risk and vulnerability are controlled. The argument
advanced here is that social protection can contribute to economic growth, and may be
essential if growth is to be ‘pro-poor’. Achieving the income Millennium Development Goal
should include a focus on increasing the average incomes of the poor. DFID’s draft policy
framework on pro-poor growth emphasises the need to:
create strong incentives for investment;
foster international economic links;
provide broad access to assets and markets; and
reduce risk and vulnerability.
Reducing risk and vulnerability is part of a broad strategy: the degree to which direct
interventions are needed will depend on the degree of success achieved in the other three
elements of the strategy, as well as the nature of hazards, the level and spread of risks,
and the degree of vulnerability poor people experience. Ideally, the costs and benefits of
reducing risk and vulnerability through social protection measures should be compared
with other approaches. Of course, if there were developed credit and insurance markets
there would be less need for social protection.
Economic growth is critical for social protection: it provides both the additional incomes
which allow for critical private and informal transfers and mutual support, but also the basis
for public revenues which can be used as insurance and for basic social security to
enhance the quality of life for citizens. This is especially important for the non or less
economically active. This is relatively uncontested: on the other hand questions about how
much public revenue should be used for such purposes will always be controversial; the
19

potentially negative impact of such expenditures on growth has received much learned
attention, and is a reason why governments and the international community have been
historically reluctant to devote substantial resources to social protection. However, it
should not assumed that there is a trade-off between economic growth and social
protection: the argument here is that there are likely to be complementarities and
synergies.
Market failures
Market failures are partly responsible for the levels of risk and vulnerability faced by the
poor. The absence of insurance markets and the failure of banking services to reach poor
people mean that the poor have less opportunity to save for their own protection, and no
access to formal insurance against shocks. Such failures may account for a substantial
proportion of persistent low rates of economic growth.35 Dealing with the causes of such
market failures (high transactions costs, asymmetric information) will take time and
institutional development; financial sector reform combined with spreading microfinance
institutions to the greatest extent possible represents the way forwards. In the meantime
social protection not only may provide substitutes for savings and insurance opportunities,
particularly for the poor, which will enable them to become more productive, but will also
help correct market failures.
Labour market failures are also important for poor people, who tend to gain significant
proportions of their livelihood through casual labouring, migration and (for the lucky)
remittances. Poor people are often not free to associate and bargain over wages and
working conditions; may be subject to forms of forced labour; and may have to rely on
child labour and experience social discrimination in the labour market.36 The
implementation of the internationally agreed core labour standards dealing with these
issues will take time to achieve, especially for the poor in the informal economy. Social
protection measures can play a role in tightening wage labour markets, preventing child
labour, and reducing discrimination. For example, the much studied Maharashtra
Employment Guarantee Scheme combats social discrimination by offering a minimum
employment by right.
Social protection can also have significant impacts on transactions in local markets.
Providing pensions or other widespread forms of cash allowance puts income into the
hands of many people who have little and may be economically less active; they are likely
to use it in local markets and buy local produce. This can have an impact on the structure
of demand, and produce multiplier effects in the local economy. In terms of pro-poor
growth, this may have particular importance in remote regions where demand is stagnant
and often satisfied from outside.37
Public works can also contribute to improving poor people’s access to markets by
developing local infrastructure, which is often the most difficult for governments to focus on
through their regular programmes.
Growth through asset development
The effect of social protection on growth will be especially potent if the result of social
protection is greater investment by the poor in human, physical, natural and financial
assets. There is growing evidence that social protection leads to asset accumulation, and
that this has income-enhancing effects where there are opportunities to use the assets:
Pensioners in Southern Africa invest in their grandchildren’s education, feeding and
clothing as well as caring for orphans; on the family farm, and in micro-enterprises,
pensioners’ working age children are liberated to do the same; we need to know the
extent to which social protection leads to asset accumulation and investment;
20

Conditional transfers can increase human capital: in Bangladesh, providing food for
education significantly increased school attendance, with only modest loss of
household income from child labour;38
Labour-based infrastructure programmes can also enhance workers’ skills through
on-the-job training; this is less true in the larger employment-based safety nets;
Public works programmes can build local infrastructure and community assets but,
if not well designed, the benefits are often short term and mainly for the local elite.
Social protection may also contribute directly to social and political stability, if coverage is
wide, allocation of benefit seen as fair, and it is seen as contributing to the ‘social contract’
between state and citizen – e.g. if it prevents famine. In turn, stability and a strong social
contract lay solid foundations for growth.
A further, but more complex relationship which requires further investigation is that
between social protection and inequality, which in turn is known to affect growth. It is
plausible that social protection benefiting the poor will reduce inequality, but if it improves
conditions for investment, this may also contribute to increased inequality. South Africa’s
good social protection system has not prevented such an increase in the last decade.
Conclusion
What is clear is that a country’s social protection strategy cannot be considered in isolation
from wider development policies: integration with other approaches to poverty reduction
through key policy processes (national development plans or PRSPs) is necessary. A key
question for national development strategies, with poverty reduction as an (or the)
objective, is the extent to which pro-poor growth can be achieved without social protection,
and over what time period.
In summary, social protection can contribute to growth in the following ways:
it helps correct market failures that contribute to poverty;
it enables risk-taking livelihood strategies;
it facilitates investment in the human and physical assets that can increase returns
to economic activity as well as reduce the risk of future poverty. In this sense, it
contributes to two of the objectives of pro-poor growth and moves well beyond
welfare;
it facilitates more rapid recovery from exposure to risk for those less able to recover
quickly;
it can include the non-active as well as the economically active poor;
it reduces behavioural responses to vulnerability, such as postponing healthcare or
switching to poor quality foods, which are understandable in the context of
vulnerable households, but restrict growth and development in the medium and long
run;
it reduces incentives for unproductive and antisocial behaviour;
by providing strong safety nets and fostering social cohesion, it also facilitates
positive social and economic change and reduces the likelihood of conflict.
Explicitly linking protection with livelihood promotion is one way of ensuring that social
protection contributes positively to economic growth. This can be accomplished in two
ways: first, by infusing promotion policies or programmes with risk and vulnerability
21

reduction objectives. This is illustrated in the case of the agricultural sector in Section 4.1.
Investments can all have substantial positive and negative impacts on the risks faced by
vulnerable and poor economically engaged households.39 The corollary of this is that
policy-makers should also keep livelihood promotion and growth as an important criterion
for assessing the utility of protection.
Secondly, the linkage can be made by ensuring that there are ‘ladders’ out of welfare. This
provides stepped opportunities for the non-active or less active to become as active as
they can, whether through self-employment or wage employment. There is a range of
(largely NGO) programmes attempting to create ladders of opportunity from which lessons
might be drawn. The most famous of these is the BRAC Income Generation for Vulnerable
Group Development.40 However, other NGOs (e.g. CARE) have also developed extensive
experience. Government policy in the productive sectors can also contribute.

22

4 Choosing social protection instruments
The purpose of this section is to offer a framework for deciding which public policy
instruments are appropriate in a particular context. This is not a well researched topic, so
this paper is breaking new ground.
Arriving at an appropriate set of instruments requires knowledge about the likely hazards
and poor people’s vulnerabilities, as well as how a range of instruments function or are
likely to function in a particular setting, both individually and in combination. This
knowledge can be relatively easily created in many situations, as in through RVAs. It is
important that this knowledge be as disaggregated as possible if the critical gaps in
provision are to be identified.
No one social protection instrument will address the multiple hazards different groups of
poor people face. While much knowledge is available about the functioning of individual
instruments, these have universally been treated by analysts and policy-makers in
isolation from each other: there is little information available about the effectiveness of
combinations of instruments. This should be a priority for future research on social
protection.
Trying to assess and provide guidance on the cost-effectiveness of particular instruments
poses challenges. It involves comparing disparate strategies, with different aims, target
groups and modes of operation, and de-contextualising a wide range of instruments in
order to do so. To our knowledge, such assessments have not taken place. Where
comparisons have taken place within a sector/ area of social protection, such as nutritional
support, we report these below. DFID country programmes could support analysis of the
relative cost-effectiveness of different options.
It is likely that any country will experience a ‘social protection trajectory’ over time.
Different combinations of instruments will be appropriate and feasible at different times,
depending on changing needs, resources, and political structures. The criteria on which
choices are made should evolve, as society’s demands and collective capacities change.
The poorest countries, which are generally also those with greatest governance
challenges, will have to start with straightforward approaches aimed at the main
insecurities faced by their populations, a large proportion of whom are poor. These might
include delivering transfers through local administrations, for example, ensuring that key
basic services are free at the point of use, or that recurring environmental risks are
addressed. Countries affected by conflict present a particular challenge. The need for
social protection is often particularly profound in countries affected by conflict, since
livelihoods, essential services and protective institutions have often been destroyed.
Temporary truces have been called to enable immunisation of children in Sri Lanka, for
example, and it may be possible to negotiate to extend this principle to other forms of
social protection.
It is important to start from the point a country has reached, and identify the critical risks
and vulnerabilities which are effectively reduced by existing policies or informal/private
measures, before going on to identify gaps in provision or debate the merits of existing
approaches.

23

4.1 Choosing combinations of instruments
Based on the analysis in preceding sections, criteria for choosing social protection
instruments would include:
contribution to reduced risk and vulnerability, resulting in income-smoothing and
reduced dependence on adverse socio-economic relationships for the poor and
vulnerable;
potential for asset development across the range of livelihood assets including
human capital, especially for the chronically poor, enabling them to participate in
and contribute to economic growth and assert their rights, and to recover after
shocks;
potential for contributing to economic growth through reducing (credit/insurance)
market failure;
contribution to socio-political stability through cost-effective broad national coverage
and policy dialogue about criteria for inclusion;
costs compared with benefits;
complementarity with existing instruments and programmes;
implementability, including political sustainability, financing, targeting, ability to be
scaled up and down, and administrative capacity required; these are particularly
important in poor countries with low governance capacity;
possible crowding out/in effects (there may be a net benefit to the poor of what is to
be crowded out/in).
As mentioned above, the emphasis should be on examining the combination of
instruments in place, their effectiveness, identifying gaps as well as problems with the
current combination, and means of filling those gaps and addressing the problems
identified. This could be done by locating the range of instruments against (i) the results of
a Risk and Vulnerability Assessment and (ii) the criteria identified above in a matrix.
In what follows, these criteria are briefly and selectively applied to individual instruments
grouped in the following categories:
safety nets
social security
human development measures
informal provision
linked protection-promotion
In most cases, benefits or disadvantages are not inherent to an instrument but depend on
programme design. In discussing each instrument or cluster of instruments, where
evidence exists, we highlight the ways impact and effectiveness can be maximised.
4.1.1 Public safety nets
These are designed to prevent destitution and help people cope with emergencies.
Coverage can be wide, with strong survival impacts where there is logistical capacity, but
targeting brings the potential for errors of both exclusion and inclusion. Safety nets smooth
incomes and, if they are implemented with regularity and well resourced as part of a ‘social
contract’, they may acquire the characteristics of insurance schemes and enable positive
changes of attitude among the poor towards more risky and productive activities, and thus
24

contribute to economic growth. This is unlikely if they remain emergency temporary
measures. In the latter case, the developmental impact is weak or even negative. In
general, a social protection approach would move away from policy based purely on safety
nets, although they remain an important constituent in many poor countries.
Food distribution and food aid
Emergency food distribution is a mechanism of last resort, applied when other protective
devices have failed. It will remain important, given the absence of effective social
protection in most poor countries. There are specific concerns from a development
perspective – in particular, the potential to distort food markets and depress production.
Distribution may also respond more to a donor's wish to shift food grain surpluses than the
economic bases of vulnerability in particular context. A social protection approach would
focus significant effort on alternative instruments wherever possible.
Public works and employment guarantees41
Public works schemes can encourage risk-taking and greater productivity by providing a
safety net, especially if this is sustained and guaranteed over a period of years, thus
effectively providing insurance against risk. It is also possible to provide widespread
coverage for the working poor through cash or food for work programmes. Beneficiaries
often support non-working household members. Careful design may also enable less ablebodied people to participate. Where such programmes become an employment guarantee,
sustained over a period of years and well integrated into government structures and
processes, like the famous Maharashtra Employment Guarantee Scheme in India, there is
evidence that farmers plant higher risk crops and the poor use savings for microentrepreneurship more readily than elsewhere.42 Critically, the guarantee is
institutionalised in law: the poor have a right to a certain number of days work per year,
which has substantially enhanced its social protection effectiveness.43 Other programmes
in Southern Africa have had similar effects.44 Public works programmes which principally
aim to create infrastructure typically have smaller coverage, but careful design and
attention to payment methods can lead to greater inclusion of women or the less ablebodied.
Generally, wage rates are set so as to discourage all but the poorest people from
participating. Although this helps avoid inclusion of better-off people, it also limits the
contribution employment schemes can make to social protection, essentially to
guaranteeing survival. This can be compounded where work days are rationed to ensure
that most people in need access at least some work. For example, wage rates for public
works in Zambia, set at slightly higher than market rates, combined with an allowance to
participants of a generous number of work days, enabled participants to accumulate
useable assets that helped them improve their situation. At the same time, many poor
people who could have benefited from a lower waged scheme were excluded.45
A major area of concern with employment programmes is that they may compound
nutritional problems, in that poorly nourished participants are required to undertake heavy
labour for low remuneration. This is particularly the case for women, older people and
young people or children.46 The latter groups are particularly likely to participate where
wages are based on piece rates, when there are strong incentives for families to maximise
income by involving as many members as possible.
Infrastructure constructed through public works can principally benefit local power-holders
or be located so as to enhance potential patronage gains (i.e. not necessarily in the
geographically neediest areas). However, well designed public works programmes, as in
some social funds, can manage to create synergies between employing poor people and
25

creating infrastructure which enhances livelihoods (e.g. roads, irrigation facilities in remote
areas) or wellbeing (e.g. improved sanitation or renovation of school buildings).47
The administrative costs of public works programmes may be high in relation to the
benefits (in addition to programme administration, there are the costs of building materials
and equipment, and targeting). Cash transfers may be more cost-effective, despite
concerns about welfare dependency. However, many very poor people highly value
infrastructure improvements, despite the lukewarm response of many development
professionals who see them as insufficiently developmental.
4.1.2 Social security
These are often the most controversial instruments, with policy-makers understandably
worrying about welfare dependence and budgetary commitments. However, pensions and
allowances have the potential to start small in a poor country, and grow over time as the
country can afford more, enabling investment of savings by poor families in enterprise and
education. Demand for local goods and services is generated, even in remote areas, and
cash transfers may be a better way to achieve this than expensive area-based
development programmes.48 The feasibility of achieving widespread geographical
coverage through the private sector, post offices or local administration could potentially
bring socio-political integration benefits.
Food subsidies
Many countries which had universal subsidies on basic food commodities have moved to
targeted subsidies and ration card systems to reduce the costs to the budget. Targeted
food subsidies on staple products are an effective way of enhancing the nutritional status
of groups vulnerable to malnutrition, or to protect people during a crisis. While they are
relatively expensive, food subsidies have played a role in ending vulnerability to famine in
Bangladesh, India, Indonesia and elsewhere. If well designed in terms of targeting, the
value of the subsidy, the degree of stigma involved in benefiting, and administrative
efficiency, targeted food subsidies (e.g. via ration cards) may represent an effective social
protection instrument; however, the storage costs of food mean that these can be more
expensive to implement than cash transfers, and may be more subject to loss and theft. A
critical issue is ensuring that the value of the ration keeps place with inflation and is set at
a level which provides adequate food supplies to poor and vulnerable people. When Sri
Lanka switched from a universal food subsidy to a targeted ration in 1979, failure to index
the ration to rising food costs meant that its protective value to poor households halved
over a three-year period.49
Targeted transfers: allowances and pensions
Cash transfers may be based on either an insurance mechanism (whereby recipients have
paid a certain fee over a defined period in order to be eligible for financial assistance
during hard times – contributions which may be supplemented by the state), or may
constitute social assistance, which is non-contributory and paid out of general revenues.
This section will focus on social assistance, which is much more common in poor
countries. Social assistance transfers aim to secure wellbeing by making poor or destitute
people's income up to an agreed threshold level, often defined with reference to a
minimum food basket. They thus aim to protect against hunger and provide a minimum
nutritional floor, usually with some allowance for other basic goods such as soap or
clothing. Usually, such transfers are provided for a specific period, and are often meanstested.

26

The effectiveness of cash transfers in protecting recipients clearly depends on the size.
However, even very small transfers can have an important protective effect. For example:
In Hungary in the mid-1990s, without family allowances, child poverty would have
been 85% higher, while in Poland it would have been a third higher. 50
Without Kyrgyzstan’s social protection system, 24% more people would be living in
extreme poverty. As poverty is concentrated among families with children, many of
these would have been children.51
In Zambia, a GTZ supported programme is proving effective in supporting very poor
households with no members of working age, enhancing food security and
improving children's school attendance.52
Cash transfer programmes are also in place in South Africa, Brazil, Ecuador, Chile,
Colombia, Honduras and Jamaica, as well as most Central and Eastern European and
former Soviet countries.53
A major concern about cash and in-kind transfers is that these can create dependency
(discouraging paid or income-generating work). However, in most poor countries, it is
unlikely that benefits can be set at levels that do so – at most they will supplement
incomes and prevent the most damaging effects of poverty. Meanwhile, transfers that
manage to reduce working hours, particularly among parents of young children, could
have a substantial positive impact on child wellbeing, given young children's particular
nutritional health vulnerability.
Pensions
Pensions play a key role in old age support, but research and policy have focused on
contributory programmes promising retirement income for formal sector workers. Noncontributory pensions, on the other hand, consist of cash transfers programmes targeted
at poorer older persons and their households. A particular focus on non-contributory state
pensions is justified by the potential of even modest pensions to have significant incomesmoothing and asset development effects, as well as influencing the pattern of demand for
goods and services in a pro-poor direction, and the disproportionately high rates of poverty
among older people in many countries. Even poor countries (India and Nepal, for example)
have introduced universal pensions for the over 75s, widows, and some other specific
categories, with high rates of coverage and a reasonable degree of ‘customer satisfaction’
and popular support achieved within a decade.54 The starting point has been limited –
targeted, and low value, enabling widespread coverage – but can evolve over time into
provision which has greater developmental impact. Middle-income countries in Southern
Africa and Brazil have universal pension schemes which have enabled pensioners to
support grandchildren through school and better cope with health crises, and working
adults freed of financial responsibility for parents to do the same, or to invest in small
businesses.55 In Southern Africa, non-contributory pensions also play a critical role in
protecting households where adults are absent owing to HIV/AIDS or labour migration.
Many of the same points are likely to apply to disability allowances.
Labour market measures
DFID has made a commitment to supporting the ILO’s four ‘core labour standards’56 as
universally applicable human rights: freedom of association and the right to collective
bargaining; elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour; effective abolition of
child labour; and elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation.
Other ‘substantive’ measures, including protective ones such as minimum wages and
social security measures for the formally employed and control of workplace hazards are
seen as context specific.
27

Given that the poorest people are generally not employed in formal sector jobs with such
levels of protection, these are instruments for preventing employed people falling into
poverty, rather than helping lift the poorest out. Specific aspects of employment protection,
such as maternity protection or accident insurance, can make particularly strong
contributions to protecting the wellbeing of mothers and children or households in general
at vulnerable periods of the life cycle or moments of shock. Maternity protection consists of
the implementation of legal rights (to protective employment conditions) and cash transfers
for periods of childcare. This includes:
guaranteed periods of maternity leave with the job kept open;
protection from work potentially injurious to health during pregnancy, and adequate
protection at other times;
cash benefits during maternity leave, usually financed through a system of social
insurance payments.
As a country progresses along its ‘social protection trajectory’, there will be opportunities to
extend coverage to the informal sector where most poor people are employed. The critical
issue is therefore to get trades unions to take up the cause of the informal sector and work
with government, insurance organisations, the small-scale private sector, and other civil
society organisations, to extend protection. SEWA, the union of self-employed women in
India, provides a classic example.
4.1.3 Human development and child protection measures57
There is a variety of instruments which can prevent shocks destroying human capital,
where poor people respond to shocks by taking children out of school, reducing food
consumption, or stopping using health services (especially for children and women).
Interrupting intergenerational poverty can also be facilitated by measures that improve the
access of poor households to human capital – through better health (especially for
breadwinners), child and maternal nutrition, and education. These represent important
measures to spread the benefits of increased investment in health and education services
to the poor. While the economic benefits are long term, inclusion will be appreciated in the
short term, with significant political integration benefits for a country.
Targeted fee waivers and exemptions, and life line tariffs
Fees and user charges are widely held to have reduced the use poor people make of
public services and to have increased their spending on health and education. Their
abolition is beneficial to the poor, but has to be accompanied by significant investment in
improving the quality of services. In Uganda, the abolition of health charges involved
increased budget allocations for pharmaceuticals, improvements in drug supply systems, a
two-thirds increase in pay for doctors and speeded up payroll reforms.58
Exemption to the charges for a particular service (e.g. immunisation), and a general waiver
of fees for accessing health, water or education as a whole are measures which fall short
of abolition of charges, and therefore may be attractive to policy-makers. Waivers are
certainly preferable to charging full costs for poor people. Benefiting is usually based on
membership of a vulnerable group (defined by age, pregnancy, or geographical location),
or a means test. However, if fees are a small proportion of the total cost of accessing a
service, complementary support will be required to reduce or provide for meeting the other
costs.
Waiver policies are generally introduced for basic services. However, it is often at
secondary level that charges are highest and that the biggest opportunities for risk
28

reduction and human capital development occur59 – so there are strong arguments for
extending waivers to cover services at that level.
Life line tariffs for water have been introduced to ensure a basic minimum level of
consumption, with charges levied above that minimum on those judged able to pay. In
South Africa, for example, 6,000 litres per year is provided free to each household, with
additional consumption billed at an increasing tariff. This requires providers to generate a
surplus through slightly higher marginal costs for bulk users. A critical mass of fully paying
customers is needed: this approach is applicable to towns and cities, and may need to be
supplemented by measures to enable poor people to get connected to the service in the
first place – such as payment in kind, or microfinance. The vast majority of poor people in
many cities still live beyond major service provision infrastructure. Measures to support
small-scale providers in providing quality services at reasonable cost may be more costeffective.
Health insurance
Health insurance schemes are introduced as an alternative to user charges, both to
finance the health service and to promote access to it. Subsidies on formal sector
schemes may reduce the resources available for services used by poor people. However,
the extension of national formal sector health insurance to cover the poor has succeeded
(with the exception of reaching the poor in remote areas) in Thailand, where poor families
can buy a health card for 30 baht a year. This is being tried out elsewhere.
More tried and tested are community health insurance schemes in situations where users
pay substantial amounts for health services. These ‘offer considerable benefits to the
majority poor. However, the poorest require special arrangements to enable them to
access benefits under the scheme (such as subsidies from government or from higher
income scheme members) and few schemes have effectively implemented these
arrangements’.60 It is difficult to design a scheme which is both affordable and provides
adequate cover, but some schemes have achieved this – for example, the Burundi Carte
d’Assurance Maladie was affordable for 77% of the population, and had enrolled 54% of
the target population by 1992.61 Where the majority of the population is very poor and
unlikely to be able to afford even low insurance premia, it is probably better to try other
measures.
Conditional transfers
Though historically, in the OECD and transition countries which have had the most
extensive social assistance programmes, cash transfers have not required any specific
action from recipients, a newer kind of transfer, conditional on recipients or their families
undertaking certain activities (e.g. children attending school) has become increasingly
common, particularly in Latin America. Such programmes aim to maximise the value of a
particular transfer by ensuring it both alleviates current poverty and enhances future
wellbeing, particularly through supporting children's school attendance and, in some cases
(e.g. Mexico, Nicaragua), mandating visits to health centres.
In Mexico, Progresa (now renamed Oportunidades), a child benefit and social
development programme which is conditional on children attending school has
reduced teenagers’ involvement in work by 12–20%, reduced the incidence of
illness among participating 0–5 year olds by 12%, and reduced rates of stunting.62
In Nicaragua, the Red de Protección Social managed to stop food consumption
declining in poor families during a coffee price shock that seriously undermined
poor people’s livelihoods. It has also increased school enrolment by 22% and
attendance by 30%.63
29

In Bangladesh, children participating in the Food for Education programme (now
renamed and reoriented to provide Cash for Education) have 20–30% higher
enrolment rates and stay in school between six months and two years longer than
non-participant children. This may increase lifetime earnings by 7–25%.
Conditional transfers are a part of a package which must also include investment in health
and education services to improve quality and coverage. Bangladesh’s experience with
funding entirely from domestic revenues illustrates that these can be financially
sustainable in a low-income country. No evaluations of conditional transfer programmes
have yet examined how beneficiaries perceive the conditions they have to satisfy, and the
argument can be made that they are inconsistent with a rights-based approach.
Conditional transfers are likely to be most appropriate where the opportunity cost of using
a service is high (e.g. a strong market or demand at home for child labour). Where the
barriers are financial, a simple subsidy (e.g. a scholarship) may have lower administrative
costs.
Childcare and child nutrition
Early childhood development programmes are much in favour as win-win human
development investments which also release adults for productive work or siblings for
school attendance.64 However, there is little evidence of their effectiveness in helping
break intergenerational poverty cycles (owing in part to low levels of resourcing, and in
part to the short periods of existence of many such programmes in the South).65 Their
greatest contribution to social protection may be in providing secure care for young
children while enabling their carers to work, an important issue for the majority of lowincome households, and of specific importance where poor households have taken in
orphaned young children.
Micro-nutrient supplementation programmes represent a cost-effective way of contributing
to interrupting intergenerational transmission of poverty, for example through iron and folic
acid supplementation for pregnant women, and vitamin supplements for young children.
These recognise that poor people are often unable to buy or grow their way out of
nutritional deficiencies. The fortification of staple foods (such as salt with iodine) needs to
be subsidised to reach poor people. In the longer term, these need to be combined with
food security measures to enhance self-provision.
School feeding programmes are popular with policy-makers, but have been generally
negatively evaluated as far as improving the nutrition of vulnerable children is concerned,
since the latter are not specifically targeted, are often pre-school or not in school and, on
receiving food at school, may get less at home. There would appear to be strong
educational benefits, however, with increased school attendance and improved
educational performance, especially of malnourished children. Where poverty and hunger
undermine children’s ability to concentrate at school, school feeding is likely to be
effective, particularly if provided before classes. It would be useful to compare the effect
with that of conditional transfers.
Microfinance
Microfinancial services can form part of a social protection strategy in the following ways:
credit components can contribute both to income-smoothing and to investment in
production;
savings components can provide a buffer to draw in case of shocks, and can help
finance longer term investments;

30

micro-insurance components (less common) can provide protection against crop
failure or health shocks.
The contribution any of these microfinancial instruments make to social protection will
depend largely on programme design. Maximising flexibility to users is likely to increase
the socially protective value of microfinancial instruments, e.g. a scheme which allows
savings to be accessed easily is likely to be more useful than one with a number of
restrictions on the use of funds, though there are trade-offs between flexibility and low
operating costs and thus low costs to users. As is widely accepted, the contribution of
microfinance to protecting the very poorest is likely to be minimal. This is both because
scheme design tends to encourage exclusion or self-exclusion of the poorest, and
because participation can actually increase the risks poor people face, especially where
default on payments leads to confiscation of assets. However, as numerous evaluations
have shown, microfinance has proved a useful tool for many poor people.
Agricultural (or other sectoral) policy
The interactions between the domestic (household consumption) and productive spheres
are neglected by policy-makers, who are typically divided into communities (ministries,
departments, professions) dealing with one or the other. Support to the domestic sphere
(transfers, micro-savings, support for school attendance etc.) allow beneficiaries to
consume and thereby express demand for goods and services. On occasion, transfers are
invested in productive activities, as, for example, with South African pensions.66
By contrast there are relatively few efforts within the agricultural or productive sectors to
bring the extremely poor or non-working poor into the productive sphere, through special
programmes like the BRAC Vulnerable Group Development Programme
4.1.4 Conclusions
Of the instruments discussed above, cash transfers have the greatest flexibility. They can
enable poor and vulnerable people to make their own choices about how best to improve
their own situation, what and when to invest, and what and when to consume, and as such
are most consistent with a rights-based approach to social protection. Though of all social
protection instruments, cash transfers raise the greatest concerns about affordability,
sustainability and dependency, the administrative costs are arguably lower than for
instruments involving the provision of food or procurement of building materials and tools.
Increasingly, cash transfers are supplanting in-kind transfers – for example, cash for work
rather than food for work programmes are increasingly common, and school subsidies are
starting to displace school feeding programmes.
However, cash transfers alone are not best placed to address all forms of vulnerability.
Clearly, large-scale environmental risks or epidemics will require correspondent public
action: safety nets remain important. Specific nutritional risks are likely to be best tackled
through a combination of specific nutritional support and wider action to improve food
security. There may also be concerns about transfer recipients not passing on benefits to
intended beneficiaries, though these may be partially addressed either by targeting the
intended beneficiary directly or by making transfers conditional on certain activities (e.g.
school or health centre attendance).
4.2 Targeting
Having emphasised the need for a disaggregated analysis of risk and vulnerability (Section
3.1), and the ways in which social protection can work to the benefit of the chronically and
31

less active poor as well as the transitorily and active poor (Section 2), it would seem logical
to argue a strong case for targeted social protection.
The debate rages on the relative merits of universal versus targeted (or means-tested)
transfers. Both are potentially consistent with a rights-based approach to social protection,
one approach emphasising the universality of entitlements, the other particularly
supporting poor, vulnerable or marginalised people. The case for universal entitlements is
that (particularly in very poor contexts) means-testing is simply too costly, and the middleclass and elites will have a greater stake in, and thus will be more likely to support, a
programme from which they also benefit. This may particularly be the case for social
insurance-based programmes.67 The South Africa Basic Income Grant campaign argues
for universal transfers which are reclaimed from better-off people through the tax system;
however, this is clearly only workable in economies where substantial proportions of
better-off people are in the formal economy.
The case for targeting is supported by some empirical evidence. 30+ social protection
programmes in Latin America were found as more likely to benefit the genuinely poor than
was untargeted provision of basic services.68 A wider sample of 111 projects in developing
countries suggested that targeting generally produced better results, but in a quarter of the
projects there was a regressive outcome.69
The case for targeted support rests mostly on cost grounds, and is intended to avoid
leakage to non-poor people; on the whole, donors and governments are more inclined to
this position, and the vast majority of social assistance transfers are targeted. However,
the lessons of decades of targeting benefits to the food insecure are:
There is a need to differentiate between the technical identification process and the
implementation process.
The costs of exclusion errors (excluding people who should have been in a
scheme) can be much greater than the benefits of cost savings derived from
introducing targeting. The result may be that fewer poor people benefit under a
targeted scheme than under a universal scheme if scarce benefits are captured by
the better-off.70
On balance the food security literature suggests that benefiting the whole community – at
least at the local level – is better than attempting to target. This suggests that targeting can
be carried out where there are simple categories which make sense (age, location,
recognised degree of exclusion), within which provision ideally should be universal.
Examples would be pensions targeted at all over 75s, widows and agricultural labourers
over 65. However, depending on the structure of the labour market, the latter category
might be difficult to operationalise at the point of retirement unless it has been an
administrative category during an agricultural labourer’s life.
Poor countries typically have less administrative capacity for targeting, and this is where
the highest errors are likely to be. It is especially important to keep targeting simple in this
context. Narrow targeting excludes. In OECD countries, the working poor are commonly
excluded. In Kyrgyzstan, 96% of social assistance goes to poor families with children. Poor
childless families are thus effectively excluded.71
Targeting by stage in the life cycle (e.g. children (especially child labourers), disabled
people, workers reliant on labour markets, old people) tends to focus on easily
categorisable groups rather than guide policy-makers to investigate how life cycles affect
vulnerability at different times. Older people, for example, face many different risks and
32

hazards and are vulnerable in different ways depending on status, age, position in a family
and so on. Understanding these in a disaggregated way is a useful function for a
vulnerability assessment. Some countries have developed different levels and criteria for
supporting these different groups within older people.
The evidence suggests that targeting is often not the best approach, although it will
continue to be invoked on cost grounds. Given this, it is important to review briefly the pros
and cons of alternative targeting mechanisms (Table 2).
Table 2 Advantages and disadvantages of targeting mechanisms
Targeting
mechanisms

Administrative costs

Susceptibility to inclusion
and exclusion errors

Political aspects

Means-testing

High – incomes are
very difficult to assess

Low, providing accurate
information can be
obtained, depending on
honesty of administrators.

Degree of intelligence
required to verify claims
may be unpalatable;
politically may be only way
to make acceptable to elite.

Proxy indicators

Medium

Medium

Community-based

Low for government;
but high for local
community which has
to take invidious
decisions. May
perceive targeting as
irrational or impossible:
‘we are all poor’.

Variable – necessary
transparency and
flexibility hard to achieve
in practice.

Liable to local elite capture
and to replicate existing
forms of discrimination. May
exacerbate divisions in a
community.

Self-targeting

Low

Low if well designed.
However, targeting is
usually not the driving
feature of design.

Can create stigma for
poorest and socially
excluded households if
achieved through low
wages, or inferior food
payments.

4.3 Financing social protection
There is a broad statistical relationship between economic development and public
expenditure on social protection, but this comes with considerable regional and intercountry variation. Political economy explains the demand for it; revenue collection capacity
constrains its supply. Increased expenditure requires redirecting expenditure from other
areas (difficult to achieve except over long time periods), raising revenues, or external
support (or a combination). Social insurance (taxation through the payroll) is not a policy
option for low-income countries. Closing indirect tax exemptions (which often have strong
benefits for the non-poor) may hold greater promise. Linking tax specifically to social
protection (earmarking) may hold attractions for politicians who have to justify tax changes.
The options for low and very low-income countries are very limited, and external finance is
crucial.
The start-up costs of a formal social protection system are high, but not insurmountable. A
system intended to provide universal (targeted) coverage can be implemented in certain
geographical areas and then extended. Progresa in Mexico did this. Alternatively, it can be
initiated with certain vulnerable groups and then expanded. For example, South Africa's
Child Support Grant was initially provided to households with children under 8, and is now
being extended to under 13s.72

33

Donors have shown strong preference for short-term, discrete, and infrastructural projects,
as opposed to more broadly supporting the development or strengthening of social
protection policies and programmes. But ‘social protection is not just for Christmas’ – it
requires sustained recurrent resourcing in order to maintain ex ante measures.
International moves to budget support as a main vehicle for external financing offers an
unparalleled opportunity to enhance external finance for social protection, since the main
financial requirement of well institutionalised social protection is predictable recurrent
funding, and priorities would be determined through a PRSP and budget process. The
challenge for donors is to ensure that budget support is predictable and can be extended
over the longer time periods required to institutionalise social protection.73
A further challenge occurs in financially devolved governmental systems, where local
government may use its legitimate discretion to decide not to allocate its resources to
social protection, even if this has been the understanding between donor(s) and
government. Vietnam is a case in point, where the degree to which province governments
are concerned about risk and vulnerability and advance social protection programmes
probably depends on a mix of the strength of the relevant department at the province level,
the resources available, the imagination of officials involved, composition of the local
population (which may carry with it some political implications), and a variety of other
factors.74

34

5 Institutionalising social protection
This section starts with an investigation of the country contexts for social protection, and
proceeds to outline the key decision areas important in institutionalising it in national
development policy.
5.1 Context matters
There are four types of country context in which different sets of issues will emerge. There
are transitional countries with a good institutional infrastructure, a strong constituency for
social protection, but tremendous difficulties maintaining previous standards of provision
(Box 9). There are Middle-Income Countries, which have started down the welfare state
road either through social insurance (common in Latin America) or social assistance
(common in Southern Africa and East Asia). These countries have normally achieved a
limited extension of formal social security mechanisms to the poor. A third group is of poor
countries which have nevertheless a range of social protection mechanisms in place –
largely in South Asia. Here the problem has been to grow and universalise these schemes.
The fourth and biggest group of developing countries are those with very little formal or
institutionalised social protection. This category includes both countries with Poverty
Reduction Strategies supported by donors, some of which feature social protection, and
countries which are variously labelled ‘difficult to assist’, fragile, ‘poorly performing’, and in
which operational PRSs are rarer. Most of this section is directed at the latter category.
Box 9: Lessons from poor transition countries: case study of Kyrgyzstan.
As part of its Soviet legacy, Kyrgyzstan, like other CIS-775 countries, has formal systems of social protection
which, in principle, cover all citizens. CIS-7 countries have implemented social protection reforms with WB
assistance – aiming to increase sustainability, reduce the administrative costs of the system and improve
targeting. Kyrgyzstan – like other poor countries in the CIS – indicates that a very poor country (Kyrgyzstan’s
GDP capita was US$270 in 2001) can run a social protection system that helps protect the most vulnerable.
Kyrgyzstan's social protection system now comprises a social insurance fund (known as the Social Fund)
from which old age and disability pensions are paid; a Mandatory Health Insurance Fund, which covers the
costs of health treatment both for the working population and for children and older people; and a social
assistance system, which provides small amounts of cash assistance on a means-tested basis to people
living below the Guaranteed Minimum Consumption Level.
As in other CIS countries, both pensions and benefits (social assistance) have been subject to a number of
problems over the transition years. Problems of cash flow have meant that both have often been paid late,
and sometimes in kind (i.e. with surplus humanitarian food aid), though there is some evidence that these
are starting to improve now (FiA and CASE, 2003). Low pensions and benefits are also a cause for concern,
though the available evidence suggests that these do make an important contribution to the living standards
of the poorest – the average monthly benefit of 93 som in 2002 (equivalent to £1.20) constituted on average
15% of recipients’ income (ibid.:79). The Ministry of Labour and Social Protection is experimenting with
providing monthly cash assistance (known as the Unified Monthly Benefit) as lump sums which recipients
can use to invest in businesses. So far this has not been very successful; however, one reason for this is the
small size of the lump sum, and the Ministry is now doubling this to see if it is any more effective.
Where poverty is so widespread, as in Kyrgyzstan, the social protection system is not simply protecting
people from falling into worse poverty, it is doing an important job of contributing living standards,
guaranteeing a minimal level of consumption, and thus protecting people's basic rights to food. Indeed,
World Bank analysis suggests that, without the social protection system, the extreme poverty headcount
would have increased by 24%, the poverty gap by 42% and the severity of poverty by 57%, while the overall
poverty headcount would have increased by 10% (World Bank, 2003a:162). Furthermore, these levels of
social protection do not represent an unsustainable drain on public resources – in 2002, they represented
3% of GDP and are scheduled to rise to 3.7% of GDP in 2006 (GoKR, 2003). Social protection in Kyrgyzstan
thus forms one important component of an integrated poverty reduction strategy.

35

Different social protection ‘trajectories’76 will be discernable in these varied contexts: in the
last category, many governments will be sceptical, preferring to focus on economic growth
and basic services, and arguing the unaffordability of ex ante social protection given
limited public revenues. They may prefer to stick with ‘safety nets’ for the time being. One
could envisage a progression from the public provision safety nets designed to take over
from individuals, households and communities only when their coping strategies fail;
through the development of conditional transfers which support access by the poor and
vulnerable to basic services; to a basic social assistance package comprising disability
allowances and basic pensions. The latter would be likely to be seen as the least growth
enhancing – though the arguments in Sections 2 and 3 of this paper might help to
convince policy-makers otherwise.
5.1.1 The politics of social protection
It is a truism that poor and vulnerable people lack voice, and that policy priorities and
implementation processes do not represent their interests. The question is what can be
done about this? There are medium-term answers around building social solidarity –
changing social values, particularly of elites and the middle classes,77 so that it becomes
unacceptable (or more strongly and universally unacceptable) that people go hungry or
risk becoming destitute. Solidarity is easier to maintain and build when the middle and
upper classes are socially connected with the poor and more vulnerable. Allowing the rich
to opt out of public services means that these, without their best potential advocates, are
left to become second class. However, once the rich have opted out (as they have in many
developing countries),it is probably too expensive to attract them back in the short-medium
term. Other ways need to be found to enhance the social solidarity between advantaged
and disadvantaged which would allow a degree of public support for social protection.
Drama helps: if vulnerability is dramatically exposed by events, this may help to keep alive
a public debate about the obligation of the state to ensure the reduction and mitigation of
risk, and lower the vulnerability of the most poor and vulnerable. Where there is no drama
– as with the continuing but quiet scandals of child malnutrition, maternal mortality, girls’
withdrawal from school, or old-age poverty – information asymmetry needs combating
through active journalism and research, underpinning social movements which can
advocate change and solidarity. There is often a dearth of relevant research and good
journalism in many countries on these issues, and research rarely gets disseminated to
the public and decision-makers. Social movements need freedom to operate with available
information. Statistical services need resources and capacity to provide the statistics.
Politicians play key roles in developing the policy constituency for social protection and
legitimating the policy discourse – ‘talking it up’ with key constituents who will act as policy
supporters. But other actors are also important here: civil society organisations, both those
with representative functions (trades unions, associations) and non-governmental
organisations and community-based organisations, and the media. Consultation efforts
need to be wide-ranging.
The decisions about what and how much social protection a state (or society) should offer
its citizens, how targeted it should be, and how it should be financed are fundamentally
political. There are no ‘right decisions’ in most cases, simply less wrong ones. It requires
political judgement to decide on the most appropriate combination of instruments. Social
protection only makes sense where it is sustained, so long-term political support for a
country’s approach and specific policies is vital: creating a dialogue and a consensus
around approach and policies across the political spectrum is very important. While this
dialogue can be informed by technical arguments, decisions are ultimately taken on a
36

political basis, depending on political objectives. An ideal situation would be where political
parties compete to produce the best possible approach and set of schemes to deal with
the major recognised risks and vulnerabilities.
Social protection programmes generate their own politics which is little understood:
targeting and eligibility criteria and processes offer opportunities for patronage and
corruption; resource flows offer opportunities for capture. Making information about
entitlements transparent and creating a culture in which appropriation is not acceptable are
necessary accompaniments to a positive social protection trajectory. Creating
implementation mechanisms which are remote from local politics is also advisable:
involving strong institutions (e.g. banks, post office)78 or the private sector in delivery of
benefits, as in South Africa’s universal pension scheme, secures benefits for the right
holder.
5.2 Key decisions in institutionalising social protection
In strengthening political commitment and institutional capabilities for social protection,
there are a number of questions which have emerged from the previous sections and the
literature. These are:
Are social protection policies narrow and implemented by one department, or broad
and necessarily implemented by many?
How can strong political leadership be achieved?
Which agency should lead and coordinate social protection policies?
How can informal provision be taken into account?
How can donors address the ownership question when government is reluctant to
take a wider social protection agenda on board?
5.2.1 Mainstreaming the social protection agenda
Like food security, social protection arguably does not belong in any one ministry or area
of government, but should be ‘mainstreamed’ across it.79
Particularly in low-income countries, the institutional constraints on providing social
protection through the public sector may be substantial. In this case, it is tempting to argue
that the appropriate approach is to spread actions to respond to vulnerability across a
range of policy sectors where there is a strong possibility of reasonable implementation,
and where the addition of an additional dimension would be less expensive than
developing new (or greatly enhanced) administrative structures. This would argue for more
active inclusion of vulnerability as a consideration in macroeconomic, social sector and
other relatively strong policy areas (e.g. agriculture), and adjusting these policies to reduce
vulnerability and mitigate risks. PSIA can play a role at the macroeconomic level,
particularly in moderating the pressure placed on governments by the Bretton Woods
institutions. In the social sector, free services, fee waivers, and conditional transfers would
play a role. Box 10 examines mainstreaming social protection in the social sectors.
The corollary would be continued provision of safety nets to catch people as hazards
occur. In poor countries, the obligation to do this rests heavily on the international
community – both in international law and in practice. A number of key risks are likely to
remain uncovered – especially the silent, undramatic ones featured above. The danger is
also that organisations capable of protecting the poorest would not be privileged under the
mainstreaming approach.
37

What is required is a balance, specific to each country, between mainstreaming and
specific measures. In most cases, giving strong weight to risks and vulnerabilities in
macroeconomic and social sector policies would be extremely advantageous, and
widespread understanding and support for the social protection approach is desirable. Key
factors in deciding the balance will be:
the constraints on the development of organisations within the public sector which
are capable of enabling and regulating or providing specific social protection
schemes;
the availability of funds, and the political sustainability of different schemes;
the possibilities of contracting provision out to the private sector or NGOs, where
necessary or advantageous.
Box 10: Mainstreamed sector-based social protection: towards a decision framework
Enhancing the accessibility of basic services to poor, marginalised and vulnerable people, improving their
quality, can play an important role in reducing vulnerability. Where the state is the dominant service provider,
the priority to achieve this will be investing in state services via sectoral or general budget support. Where
the poorest people make use of a greater range of service providers, securing poor people’s access to
quality services is likely to require a wider range of actions and be less amenable to financial support via
sectoral or general budget support. This includes: improved regulation of private providers, including
requirements to provide cross-subsidies or life-line tariffs to give access to the poor; and subsidies to nonstate insurance providers or the poor as their clients. Removing non-financial barriers is also important:
physical and cultural access is enhanced by addressing service provider motivation (often pay-related);
improving drug and learning material supply and use; providing mother tongue instruction at least in the early
stages of education; addressing cultural congruence of justice institutions in post-colonial societies; and
ensuring physical access to services – for example, ensuring women's and girls' needs are taken into
account in water supply and sanitation decisions. The role of donors is likely to include financial support for
reforms and technical assistance in certain areas.
Investing in mainstream services alone is unlikely to secure poor people's access and to promote human
development outcomes. For poor and vulnerable people, the opportunity costs of using even good quality,
accessible services may be prohibitive. Child labour among poor households which need the child’s labour
or income is a good example; another is not accessing health services because of transport costs. Social
protection mechanisms that address these continued barriers to uptake are needed to complement
investment in good quality accessible services. The most relevant social protection mechanisms will depend
on the key constraints to service access, but are likely to include cash transfers - whether conditional on the
use of a specific service (as in the case of legal aid, or cash for education transfers) or unconditional
payments to poor households.
Many social protection entitlements are unclaimed simply because poor people are unaware of them.
Strengthening transparency about services and poor people's entitlements is another critical dimension of
enhancing the contribution that services can make to social protection. Without stronger emphasis on
provision of information, enhanced accountability will be impossible.
Mechanisms for enhancing service provider accountability are also vital, both to enhance accessibility and
service quality. To be most effective these require some legal underpinning of the right to information, and to
hold service providers to account. Particular promising mechanisms include: district, municipality or villagelevel monitoring of government budget allocations and actual disbursements; user-provider councils; and
citizen report cards.
Ensuring complementarity between policies and provisions, within and between sectors, is vital. Mechanisms
to promote access to services should strengthen and be strengthened by interventions in other areas.
Examples include ensuring that livelihood support measures do not undermine nutrition because they require
poor people to expend excessive energy; or that health and nutrition interventions address the accessibility
of clean water. This requires strong coordination between and within sectors, whether through a PRS or
more conscious linking of sector strategies.
Short-term interventions which address immediate needs (e.g. tackle serious nutritional deficiencies) need to
be balanced with those that address longer term problems (e.g. food insecurity). There may be
contradictions and trade-offs between the two objectives and decisions should be based on an evaluation of
the costs and benefits of particular approaches. In doing so, it is important to bear in mind that although
tackling immediate human development needs may appear 'welfarist' or 'relief-oriented', it may also have
long-term (even intergenerational) benefits in breaking poverty cycles, and thus enhance productive capacity
and productivity in the long run.
Source: Marcus, Piron and Slaymaker (2004).
38

5.2.2 Leadership and coordination
Leadership is both political and bureaucratic. The commitment of leading politicians is
therefore essential. The arguments advanced under the ‘purpose’ of social protection
above should be convincing to political leaders wishing to achieve widespread popular
support, and this has been recognised by many regimes – examples are mainly from East
and South Asia, but also from South Africa and Latin America. The political momentum
behind social protection tends to gather force over a period of time. An example would be
Tamil Nadu (India), whose state government has been at the cutting edge of policy
development in India for several decades on pensions, allowances, nutrition programmes
and school meals.
Political support should not be difficult to elicit where electoral politics are taken seriously,
since large numbers of people in developing countries are poor and vulnerable. The
inclusion of the vulnerable widens the potential constituency considerably – taking US$2 or
US$1.50 a day as a proxy for vulnerability puts a very substantial proportion of the
population in this category in most developing countries.
If we accept that it is practical to mainstream social protection across a number of key
areas of government, this is unlikely to happen efficiently without bureaucratic leadership
and coordination. The lessons of ‘gender mainstreaming’ should be apparent: most sectorwide approaches (SWAps) have focused on very narrow aspects of the gender dimension
of a sector’s work.80 The gender mainstreaming experience suggests that social protection
work should proceed with comprehensive analysis, inclusive consultations, broadening the
field of officials knowledgeable about and concerned with social protection issues, linking
with PRSs or other national development strategies, and influencing or developing
monitoring tools which draw attention to the public management of risk and vulnerability.
It is difficult to be axiomatic about where the best leadership would come from within a
government. Leadership may be best from an overarching department like finance or
planning; or from a ministry in close touch with poor and vulnerable people (in India this
might be the Ministry of Rural Development, which is already responsible for pensions and
public works programmes), or from a traditional welfare-oriented ministry. Social welfare
ministries are weak in most low-income countries. Whether they can be strengthened or
not depends on various factors – if their budgets increase, so will their power and they
may stop being such weak players. If they are in charge of activities generally recognised
to be socially important (e.g. disbursing pensions) their status is likely to rise compared
with if their functions are running orphanages, juvenile detention centres and overseeing
adoptions, roles often considered marginal.
If a country does assign an important role to a leading ministry, there is some evidence
that the separation of assessing eligibility and bearing the costs has benefits for the poor
and vulnerable, since budgetary considerations are not uppermost in the procedures and
considerations affecting eligibility.81 For example, eligibility would be assessed by a social
welfare department, while the service is provided by a ministry of health or education.
A Poverty Reduction Strategy process, or equivalent, supplies an opportunity not only to
feed into the policy process risk and vulnerability assessment and knowledge about the
appropriate combinations of social protection instruments with a view to designing a social
protection strategic framework, but also to develop a leadership structure and coordination
mechanisms among the actors involved. Most I-PRSPs82 and many PRSs have identified
measures to reduce vulnerability, though few have made addressing risk and vulnerability
through social protection a key component.
39

Coordination within government is costly and difficult to achieve – witness the Vietnamese
Hunger Eradication and Poverty Reduction programme, which attempted to coordinate
government departments concerned.83 Much better to achieve this through shared policy
analysis and concepts, with each ministry or department working out how these could
usefully inform its own actions and, if additional resources are available, bidding for
resources against a set of criteria. This procedure would give teeth to the process of
coordination, and suggests that the role could be played by a central ministry (finance or
planning).
5.2.3 Facilitating and regulating informal provision
This paper has made a strong plea that the current efforts of poor people themselves to
reduce risk and vulnerability, and cope with shocks when they arise, should not go
unrecognised in policy circles. It is particularly women who are often left with the burdens
of caring for orphans, the sick and the elderly, and looking after their households in times
of emergency. Not surprisingly, it is also often women who develop collective approaches
to risk management. Few public policy instruments aim to build social capital in ways
which would reduce burdens on women and enhance the effects of informal collective
provision. Examples are: support for savings and credit groups and their associations and
federations in terms of matching resources and links to insurance schemes;84 support to
claimant groups to claim rights – for example to food, where this is recognised in law, as in
India;85 providing reinsurance cover to mutual efforts at protection, so that when these
collapse under the strain of a bigger catastrophe, they can recover rapidly.
There is so little formal social protection available in low-income countries that it is unlikely
that equitable informal protection mechanisms would be crowded out by greater formal
provision. Far more likely is that burdens would be reduced, particularly on women, and
energies released either for productive investment or for better grounded mutual
protection.86
NGOs and faith groups provide safety nets, dealing with all kinds of crises in the
communities where they are located, often doing it in innovative ways. These could be
brought into national dialogues about social protection with advantage. Persuading them to
reorient some of their energies towards risk prevention and mitigation and assisting
recovery could reap significant dividends. Many countries have registered NGOs and
CBOs, and governments have fora in which they can promote such shifts. Where there is
good NGO geographical coverage in a country whose government is reluctant to expand
the social protection umbrella, this may be a way to make progress in the meantime.
The private sector can also play a positive role as contractor as well as provider. Provision
by the private sector tends not to have been progressive – the poor are usually excluded
from insurance, for example. And tax breaks for private insurance can effectively leach
resources from public expenditure. However, NGOs or government can also link groups of
poor people to insurance providers for accident/life, health and other forms of insurance,
and correct the biases of the market. NGO providers of microfinance that become private
banks may still retain socially responsible objectives, which can include the provision of
savings and insurance products for the poorest, particularly if NGOs or CBOs make the
necessary links.
The private sector can implement social protection schemes: the classic case is the South
African pension, which is distributed and protected by private firms. Public-private
partnerships may have particular relevance where government’s outreach is limited, and
where private sector agents can be held more accountable than is possible in the public
sector.
40

5.2.4 Ownership of the agenda
Governments in low-income countries committed above all to fostering higher rates of
economic growth may be reluctant to widen the social protection umbrella out from the
scanty safety nets already provided often with considerable international help.
Can donors stimulate greater political interest and leadership? Here, the case of Malawi is
of interest, where donor pressure was instrumental in the development of a strong social
protection pillar in the PRSP. However, this had the effect of putting the government on the
back foot in two ways:
There was a presumption among donors, especially the World Bank which led the
process, that there was a right way to reduce livelihood insecurity in Malawi,
whereas in reality there was a spectrum of possible contrasting approaches,
involving more or less state intervention, with no easy method of distinguishing one
‘right one’.
A contest over who would control the process – government or World Bank –
emerged, obscuring the merits of the case. In a fiscally weak state like Malawi,
donors have a huge amount of power with which they can steamroller through their
solutions. This does not allow national policy ownership to evolve.87
However, the upshot of this debate is that social protection is firmly on the policy agenda in
Malawi, and it will be interesting to see what real progress can be made despite the donor
origins of the emphasis.
Ethiopia provides a further example of government and donors collaborating to take the
social protection agenda forwards (Box 11).
Box 11: Ethiopia: support for a national safety net
Background
Hunger is widespread in Ethiopia. Even in years without shocks (e.g. drought) at least seven million people
require relief (a figure that increased to over 13 million in the drought years 2002/3). This reflects the
existence of a large ‘chronically food insecure’ population. Even if the climate is favourable, these people
have insufficient assets (e.g. land, oxen for ploughing, labour) to produce or earn enough to meet their
needs. The response to these predictable chronic needs is the same as that for unpredicted emergencies –
that of short-term emergency relief. This has two major problems: (i) emergency relief – largely food aid –
feeds people but does not prevent increasing destitution over the years. Faced with crisis and insufficient
and untimely relief, households deplete the very assets they need for future survival. Once destitute, they are
unable to escape their dependency on relief. At the same time, this ‘chronic’ group is not benefiting from
growth-related ‘development’ programmes, as these tend to favour those who already have productive
capacity and assets. It is this ‘gap’ – between relief and development – that the government of Ethiopia
(GoE) and partners wish to address with a national safety net. (ii) Chronic food insecurity remains outside of
government accountability. Through recourse to international emergency appeals, government has
relinquished its responsibility for structural food insecurity to the international community.
By replacing the current ‘emergency’ system for the chronically food insecure with a multi-annual safety net,
we can better help people move out of destitution and assist the state transformation agenda for more
accountable government.
First, the delivery of more predictable, timely and adequate resource transfers will serve as a protective
measure by reducing the need for households to make hasty decisions (such as distress sales of assets)
that erode their chance of escaping poverty in the longer-term. It can also be productive. For example,
guaranteed transfers allow households to undertake activities which incur some risk, but may lead to greater
productivity (e.g. through on-farm investments). In addition, with the use of conditional transfers (e.g.
transfers linked to public works), safety nets can directly generate community assets that help reduce
vulnerability.
Secondly, the government budgeting for five million chronically food insecure increases its accountability for
vulnerability in its own citizens – moving away from a system where needs are primarily met by international
appeals to a system where the government provides a multi-annual budget – thereby increasing democracy.

41

The GoE Safety Net Programme
GoE prioritises the need to escape from year-on-year emergency relief. Both the Coalition for Food Security
(2003) – a government framework supported by all donors – and the country’s Sustainable Development
Poverty Reduction Programme (SDPRP) include the establishment of a national safety net as a core
programme with which to address chronic food insecurity.
The Joint Government-Multi-Donor Safety Net Task is finalising the programme implementation manual for
the national safety net. This will bring five million chronically food insecure people out of unpredictable, ad
hoc emergency relief, and into a predictable safety net by January 2005. Implementation will begin in pilot
districts in September 2004 as a means to identify additional capacity building requirements.
The safety net programme will provide cash transfers largely through DFID, World Bank and EC support, and
some food transfers through USAID and WFP to households identified by their community as chronically
food insecure. To the extent possible, transfers will be linked to employment in public works designed to
reduce vulnerability of communities (e.g. terracing and soil conservation measures to improve land
productivity, access to markets through feeder road construction, afforestation, fodder production, and
rainwater harvesting measures).
The safety net is designed to get those with potential back on the ladder of productivity – it is not simply
social welfare for five million people – while recognising that a certain number of people will not graduate
(e.g. disabled, widow-headed, orphan-headed households etc.). The safety net is therefore explicitly
designed to promote graduation of households out of extreme hunger, as the impact of predictable transfers
and asset-building reduces their vulnerability over time (something that unpredictable relief fails to achieve).
The prospects for graduation will be further maximised as the safety net is to be integrated as a core
component of the national food security programme. Those five million eligible for transfers through the
safety net will also be eligible for the ‘asset-building’ interventions of the national food security programme.
This aims to provide households with improved technologies and farming practices, loans for livestock,
beekeeping, off-farm income-generation skills, and household micro-ponds for rainwater harvesting to
reduce vulnerability. The GoE has already allocated US$260 million of treasury resources to this budget line
for July 2004/05, and has already established the sub-budget line that will deliver transfers.
In preparation, the government has also reduced the mandate of the Disaster Prevention and Preparation
Commission (DPPC) to ‘unpredictable emergency’ functions only. Concomitantly, GoE has restructured its
former institutions to bring together the Ministry of Rural Development and Agriculture (MoARD), which has
assumed the mandate for the chronically food insecure.
Early budget estimates for the safety net component are of an annual cost of US$170 million for five million
people – US$34 per head. This is estimated at one-third the cost of providing (mostly) food transfers through
the annual emergency assistance, doing little more than feed people. As the primary trend under the
emergency system is for a growing food insecure caseload over time, we could expect costs to increase
even further.
Government and donors will contribute to a joint account, with funds flowing down to the districts through the
existing food security block grant mechanism. Implementation, monitoring and reporting will be through
existing state structures.
Source: Joanne Raisin, DFID (pers. Comm.)

42

6 Brief glossary
Conditional transfers: a transfer which is conditional on the recipient’s behaviour
Co-variant: affecting numerous households, a community or communities, a region,
country or several countries
Idiosyncratic: affecting individuals or households
Informal social protection: provided by mutual agreement, through kinships, friendship
or other informal networks
Risk: the probability of a hazard occurring
Social assistance: cash allowances
Social insurance: contributory insurance variously covering unemployment, health,
accidents
Social security: social insurance and social assistance
Vulnerable: Vulnerability defined by combination of exposure to risk, sensitivity to shock
(i.e. the impact when a shock happens) and level of resilience

43

7 References
Ayalew, D. (2003) Risk-sharing networks among households in rural Ethiopia, Leuven:
Katholieke Universiteit.
Barrientos, A. (2004), 'Regulation and social protection, in Cook, P., Kirkpatrick, C.,
Minogue, M. and Parker, D. (eds) Leading Issues in Competition, Regulation and
Development, London: Edward Elgar.
Barrientos, A. and DeJong, J. (2004) Child poverty and cash transfers, Working Paper No.
4, London: Childhood Poverty Research and Policy Centre and Save the Children
Fund.
Barrientos, A. and Lloyd-Sherlock, P. (2003) 'Non-contributory pensions and poverty
prevention: a comparative study of Brazil and South Africa', Report, Manchester: IDPM
and HelpAge International.
Bird, K (2004) ‘Fractured social policy: challenges for chronic poverty reduction’, London:
Overseas Development Institute, draft.
Bird, K. and Shepherd, A. (2003) ‘Livelihoods and chronic poverty in semi-arid Zimbabwe’,
World Development Vol. 31 No. 3.
Bitran, R. and Giedion, U. (2003) Waivers and exemptions for health services in
developing countries, Social Protection Discussion Paper, No. 0308, Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Children in Poverty Research Sub-Centre (forthcoming), ‘Childhood poverty in
Kyrgyzstan’, Research report, London: Save the Children Fund.
Christoplos, I. (2004) Agricultural Rehabilitation in Afghanistan: Linking Relief,
Development and Support to Rural Livelihoods, ODI, London (forthcoming).
Chronic Poverty Research Centre (2004) Chronic Poverty Report 2004/5, Manchester:
IDPM.
Coady, D., Grosh, M. and Hoddinott, J. (2002) ‘Targeting outcomes redux’, Paper
commissioned by the Social Protection Anchor unit for the Safety Nets Primer series,
http://www1.worldbank.org/sp/safetynets/Primers/Targerting_Article.pdf
DAC (2003) Gender equality in Sector Wide Approaches: a Reference Guide, Paris:
OECD.
Dercon, S. and de Weerdt, J. (2002) Risk-sharing networks and insurance against illness,
Working Paper, No. 2002–16, Oxford University: Centre for the Study of African
Economies.
Dercon, S. and Krishnan, P. (2000) ‘In sickness and in health: risk-sharing within
households in rural Ethiopia’, Journal of Political Economy 108: 688–727.
Dercon, S. (2003) Growth and shocks: evidence from rural Ethiopia, Working Paper, No.
2003–12, Oxford University: Centre for the Study of African Economies.
Dercon, S. and Krishnan, P. (2003) Food aid and informal insurance, Working Paper, No.
2003–01, Oxford University: Centre for the Study of African Economies.
Development Policy Review (2002) Special issue on social protection, Vol. 20 No. 5,
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Devereux, S. (2003) ‘Policy Options for Increasing the Contribution of Social Protection to
Food Security’ Forum for Food Security in Southern Africa, Theme Paper 4, Overseas
Development Institute, London.
Devereux, S. (2002a) ‘Can social safety nets reduce chronic poverty’, Development Policy
Review, Vol. 20 No. 5.
Devereux, S. (2002b) ‘Safety nets in Malawi: the process of choice’, Paper prepared for
the Institute of Development Studies conference: Surviving the Present and Securing
44

the Future: Social Policies for the Poor in Poor Countries, Institute of Development
Studies, 25–26 March.
Devereux, S. (2001) in Maxwell, S. and Devereux, S. eds (2001) Food security in subSaharan Africa, London: ITDG Publications.
Devereux, S. (2000) 'Social safety nets for poverty alleviation in Southern Africa', ESCOR
Research Report R7017 for the Department for International Development (DFID).
Devereux, S. and Sabates-Wheeler, R. (2004) ‘Transformative social protection’, Institute
of Development Studies Working Paper, draft (March).
DFID (2004) ‘Policy Framework for Pro-poor growth’, London (draft).
Edirisinghe, N. (1987) ‘The food stamp scheme in Sri Lanka: costs benefits and options’,
IFPRI Research Reports 85, Washington, DC: IFPRI.
Fafchamps, M. (2003) Rural poverty, risk and development, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Farrington, J. (2004) Social protection and livelihood promotion in agriculture: towards
operational guidelines, London: DFID.
Farrington, J. and Gill, G. (2002) ‘Combining growth and social protection in weakly
integrated rural areas’, Natural Resource Perspectives, No. 79, London: ODI.
Farrington, J., Saxena, N. C., Barton, T. and Nayak, R. (2003) ‘Post offices, pension and
computers: new opportunities for combining growth and social protection in weaklyintegrated rural areas?’, Natural Resource Perspectives, No. 87, London: ODI.
Farrington, J., Slater, R. and Holmes, R. (2004) The search for synergies between social
protection and livelihood promotion: the agriculture case, Working Paper No. 232,
London: Overseas Development Institute.
FIA (Foundation for Assistance International) and CASE Kyrgyzstan (2003) ‘Beneficiary
assessment of unified monthly benefits, socially protected prices and payment system
of housing allowances’, Final Report on the project for Technical Assistance, Credit
3389-KG.
Government of Kyrgyzstan Republic (2003) Medium term budget framework, 2004–06,
Bishkek: Ministry of Finance.
Graham, C. (1994) Safety nets, politics and the poor: transitions to market economies,
Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Grant, U. and Hulme, D. (2004) Service delivery and the poorest, Manchester: CPRC.
Grosh, M (1994) Administering targeted social protection programmes in Latin America:
from platitudes to practice. World Bank
Harris, G. (ed.) (1999) Recovery from armed conflict in developing countries: an economic
and political analysis, London: Routledge.
Holzmann R. and Jørgensen, S. (2000) ‘Social Risk Management: A new conceptual
framework for social protection and beyond’, Social Protection Discussion Paper 6,
Washington DC, World Bank
Hossain, N. and Moore, M. (2002) Arguing for the poor: Elites and Poverty in Developing
Countries, Working Paper 148, Brighton: Institute of Development Studies.
ILO (1998) Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, Geneva:ILO.
ILO (2000) World Labour Report, Geneva: ILO.
ILO (2003) ‘Working out of poverty’, Report of the Director General, Geneva, ILO.
Irudaya Rajan, S. (2004) Chronic poverty among Indian elderly, Working Paper No. 17,
Manchester: Chronic Poverty Research Centre and Indian Institute of Public
Administration.
Jackson, C. and Palmer-Jones, R. (1998) Work intensity, gender and well-being, UNRISD
Discussion Paper 96, Geneva: UNRISD.

45

Joshi, A. and Moore, M. (2000) 'Enabling Environments: Do Anti-Poverty Programmes
Mobilise the Poor?' Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 37, No. 1.
Kinsey B., Burger, K. and Gunning, J. W. (1988), ‘Coping with drought in Zimbabwe:
survey evidence on responses of rural households to risk’, World Development, Vol. 26
No. 1.
Kucera, D. (2001) The effects of co-worker rights on labor cost and foreign direct
investment: evaluating the ‘conventional wisdom’, Discussion Paper, No. 130, Geneva:
ILO.
Levy, S. and Barahona, C. (2002) ‘Targeted inputs programme (TIP): Mainj report of the
evaluation programme’, August (mimeo).
Lund, F. and Srinivas, S. (2000) Learning from experience: a gendered approach to social
protection for workers in the informal economy, Geneva: ILO.
Marcus, R. and Wilkinson, J. (2002) Whose poverty matters? Social protection,
vulnerability and PRSPs’, CHIP Working Paper, No. 1, London: CHIP.
Matin, I. and Hulme, D. (2003) ‘Programs for the poorest: learning from the IGVGD
Programme in Bangladesh’, World Development, Vol. 31, No. 3: 647–65.
Morley, S. and Coady, D. (2003) 'From social assistance to social development: a review
of targeted education programmes in developing countries', Report, IFPRI.
Moser, C. and Antezana, O. (2001) Social protection policy and practice in Bolivia: its
implications for Bolivia’s PRSP, Working Paper, No. 156, London: Overseas
Development Institute.
Penn, H. (2004) Childcare and early childhood development programmes and policies –
their relationship to eradicating child poverty, CHIP Report 8, London: CHIP.
Schubert, B. (2004) ‘Test phase results of the pilot social cash transfer scheme, Kalomo
District’, 4th Report, Zambia Ministry of Community Development and Social Services
(MCDSS)/ GTZ.
Shanks, E., Luttrell, C., Conway, T., Vu Manh Loi and Ladinsky, J. (2004) ‘Understanding
pro-poor political change: the policy process: Vietnam’ IDS/ODI draft (April).
Shepherd, A. with Kyegombe, N. and Mulumba, M. (2003) ‘HIV/AIDS, socio-economic
mobility and chronic poverty: case study results from a small panel in Rakai, Uganda’
International Conference on Chronic Poverty and Development Policy, University of
Manchester, 7–9 April.
Siegel, P. and Alwang, J. (1999) An asset-based approach to social risk management: a
conceptual framework, Social Protection Discussion Paper, No. 9926, Washington, DC,
World Bank.
Smith, W. J. and Subbarao, K. (2003) What role for safety net transfers in very low income
countries?, Social Protection Discussion Paper, No. 0301, Washington, DC, World
Bank.
Suryahadi, A. and Sumarto, S. (2001) The chronic poor, the transient poor, and the
vulnerable in Indonesia before and after the crisis, Working Paper, Jakarta: SMERU.
Tesluic, E. D. and Lindert, K. (2002) Risk and vulnerability in Guatemala: a quantitative
and qualitative assessment, Social Protection Discussion Paper, No. 0404, Washington
DC, World Bank.
UN (1966) International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, G.A. Res.
2200A, UN Doc. A/6316.
Wood, G. (2003) ‘Staying secure, staying poor: the “Faustian bargain”’ World Development
Vol 31, No 3: 455-472
World Bank (2003a) The contribution of social protection to the Millennium Development
Goals, Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank (2003b) ‘Ethiopia: risk and vulnerability assessment, Washington’, July (draft).
46

World Bank (2003c) ‘Kyrgyz Republic. Enhancing pro-poor growth’, Report No. 24638-KG,
PREM, ECA Region, Washington, DC, World Bank.
World Bank (2001) Dynamic risk management and the poor: developing a social protection
strategy for Africa, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Yates, J. and Cooper, R. (2004) Social protection and health: experiences in Uganda,
Kampala: DFID-Uganda
Young, M.E. (1998) Policy implications of early childhood development programmes in
nutrition, health and child development, Washington, DC: Pan American Health
Organization/World Bank.
Theme Papers
Piron, L-H. (2004) ‘Rights based approaches to social protection’, Draft Theme Paper 1.
Barrientos, A. (2004) ‘Financing social protection’ Draft Theme Paper 2.
Luttrell, C. (with Moser, C.) (2004) ‘Gender and social protection’, Theme Paper 3.
Marcus, R., Piron, L-H. and Slaymaker, T. (2004) ‘Basic services and social protection’,
Theme Paper 4.
Darcy, J. (2004) ‘Conflict, post-conflict and social protection’, Theme Paper 5.
Cromwell, E. and Slater, R. (2004) ‘Food security and social protection’, Theme Paper 6.
Greenslade, M. and Johnstone, K. (2004) ‘The role of social protection in pro-poor growth’,
Theme Paper 7.
Slater, R. (2004) ‘HIV/AIDS and social protection’ Theme Paper 8.

47

8 Endnotes
1

See Glossary for definitions of terms.
Social protection should be distinguished from social policy, which is grounded on the view that market
economies generate social problems which can be compensated with social policies; social protection
believes that risk and vulnerability explain why households adopt behaviour and invest in assets that are
dysfunctional to human and economic development.
3
World Bank, 2003a: 3.
4
Barrientos et al., 2004.
5
World Bank, 2001: 18.
6
Key Bank publications are: the World Development Report 2000/1 (Chapters 8 and 9); Holtzmann and
Jørgensen, 2000.
7
There are Bank publications which view social protection as ‘a set of public measures that support society’s
poorest and most vulnerable members, and help individuals, households and communities better manage
risks’ (2003a: 2).
8
Chronic Poverty Research Centre, 2004: Chapter 1.
9
Fafchamps, 2003: 198.
10
Kucera, (2001).
11
Bird and Shepherd (2003) show that recovery from the 1991 drought had eluded many households in
semi-arid Zimbabwe by 1997; and Shepherd, Kyegombe and Mulumba, 2003 show that a decade on from
the peak of the AIDS epidemic in one heavily affected Western Ugandan village, recovery has not occurred
for around half of households.
12
Wood, 2003.
13
UN, 1966
14
Additional Protocol II, to the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949, Article 14.
15
The distinction between the more and less active is, however, somewhat artificial in poor households in
low-income countries, since there are very few who are not active. Moreover the 'less active' live in
households and communities like the rest of the population and the focus of risk management and policies to
aid it also is also focused on households and communities.
16
ILO, World Labour Report 2000: 29.
17
ILO, 2003: 104.
18
World Bank, 2001: 141.
19
Devereux, 2003.
20
Smith and Subbarao, 2003.
21
Darcy, 2004.
22
Devereux, 2002a.
23
Dercon, 2003; Kinsey et al., 1998; Bird and Shepherd, 2003.
24
Suryahadi, A. and Sumarto, S., 2001.
25
World Bank, 2001: 145–46.
26
Holtzmann and Jørgensen, 2000: 13.
27
Fafchamps, 2003: 198.
28
Devereux, 2001; 2003.
29
There is more evidence from schemes and projects than has been collated on this issue. Bringing it
together should be a priority.
30
Bird and Shepherd, 2003.
31
Luttrell and Moser, 2004.
32
Ibid.
33
Bird, 2004.
34
Moser and Antezana, 2001: 15 and 26.
35
King and Levine, 1993. (ref in Greenslade and Johnstone NOT YET COMPLETED)
36
DFID, 2004.
37
Farrington and Gill, 2002.
38
However, whether increased education contributes more to growth than other potential uses for the
resources – both other social protection instruments, or other uses of public expenditure – requires research.
39
Farrington, Slater and Holmes, 2003: iv.
2

48

40

Matin and Hulme, 2003.
With food for work schemes, many of the issues discussed above, related to cash for work, apply.
However, food for work programmes typically also raise the same issues as food distribution, discussed
above.
42
Devereux, 2001.
43
Joshi and Moore, 2000.
44
For example, see Devereux, 2001.
45
Devereux, 2000.
46
Devereux, 2003: 18; Jackson and Palmer-Jones, 1998.
47
Graham, 1994.
48
Farrington, 2004.
49
Edirisinghe, 1987.
50
Barrientos and de Jong, 2004.
51
World Bank, 2003c.
52
Schubert, 2004.
53
Barrientos and de Jong, 2004.
54
Irudaya Rajan, 2004.
55
Barrientos and Lloyd-Sherlock, 2003.
56
ILO (1998)
57
For further details see Marcus, Piron and Slaymaker, 2004.
58
Yates and Cooper, 2004.
59
Grant and Hulme, 2004.
60
Bennett and Gilson, 2001, in Marcus, Piron and Slaymaker, 2004.
61
Arhin-Tenkorang, 2001, quoted in Marcus, Piron and Slaymaker, 2004.
62
Morley and Coady, 2003.
63
Morley and Coady, 2003.
64
cf Young, 1998.
65
Penn, 2004.
66
Devereux, 2003.
67
Armando Barrientos, personal communication.
68
Grosh, 1994.
69
Coady et al., 2002.
70
An example was the Malawi Starter Pack programme which supplied free seeds and fertilisers. When
community-based targeting was introduced the result was that fewer poor people benefited, as the scarcer
goods were captured by the better-off (Levy and Barahona, 2002).
71
World Bank, 2003c.
72
Barrientos and de Jong, 2004.
73
Findings from DFID’s Budget Support Evaluability study indicated that financial flows might be less
predictable compared to project-based funding.
74
Communication from Carrie Turk, World Bank.
75
The CIS-7 initiative aims to bring greater poverty focus to aid and development in the poorest CIS
countries.
76
But we do not have a precise idea of what these trajectories are in developing countries – the comparative
research has not been done.
77
Hossain and Moore, 2002.
78
Farrington et al., 2003
79
Cromwell and Slater (2004) make this argument strongly for food security.
80
DAC, 2003: 4.
81
Bitran and Giedeon, 2003.
82
Marcus and Wilkinson, 2002.
83
Shanks et al., 2004.
84
The DFID supported West India Rainfed Farming Project has been doing this.
85
Dev (2003) in Cromwell and Slater, 2004.
86
Luttrell and Moser, 2004.
41

49

87

This is extensively discussed in Devereux (2002b).

50

