1009899
research-article2021

CSP0010.1177/02610183211009899Critical Social PolicyHujo

Article

Social protection and inequality
in the global South: Politics,
actors and institutions
Katja Hujo
United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, Switzerland

Abstract
In this themed section, we explore the links between contemporary
social protection approaches and inequality in developing countries,
focusing on political economy drivers and the role of actors and institutions in recent reform and implementation processes. This introduction
article establishes some common ground by introducing context, concepts and questions. Reducing inequality is identified as a key condition for achieving inclusive and sustainable development as aspired in
the Sustainable Development Goals governments committed to in 2015.
The introduction situates the three articles in this issue, two studies of
pro-poor cash transfers in the Philippines and Kenya, and an analysis
of the new national minimum wage policy in South Africa, in a context
of contested globalisation, increasing inequality and the social turn, a
come-back of social policy as a key development instrument. After identifying the limitations and opportunities of this social turn, the article
discusses the three social protection reforms and their impact on equality and social change in the different country contexts through a lens of
contestation, institutions and transformative change.
Key words
cash transfers, minimum wage policy, political economy, Sustainable
Development Goals, transformative change
Corresponding author:
Katja Hujo, United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, Geneva, 1211, Switzerland.
Email: katja.hujo@un.org
Critical Social Policy 2021, Vol. 41(3): 343–363
© 2021 United Nations Research Institute for Social Development Article reuse guidelines: sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/02610183211009899
DOI: 10.1177/02610183211009899 journals.sagepub.com/home/csp

344

C r i t i c a l S o c i a l P o l i c y 41(3)

Introduction
Inequality, a topic which was largely neglected during three decades of
neoliberal globalisation, has finally made its way back into public debates.
Numerous people across the globe are protesting inequalities, while a significant body of scientific evidence shows that income and wealth is increasingly concentrated in the hands of the few (Credit Suisse, 2019; Oxfam, 2018;
World Inequality Lab, 2018). The negative effects of this process have been
widely demonstrated: high inequality and the associated concentration of
power results in policies and laws biased in the interest of elites, undermining democratic governance, development, poverty reduction, environment,
social cohesion and wellbeing (Bartels, 2008; Chancel, 2017; Gilens, 2012;
Stiglitz, 2012; Therborn, 2013; UNDP, 2019; UNRISD, 2010; Wilkinson
and Pickett, 2009).
Inequalities between rich and poor, men and women, rural and urban
populations, migrants and citizens, or those related to ethnicity, caste, religion, sexuality, disability and other markers of difference, are constituting
high barriers for human rights and sustainable development everywhere.
While inequalities can be particularly extreme in developing countries (and
more often in middle-income countries), their governments dispose of less
resources for equalising post-market distribution (Palma, 2019), often reverting to regressive fiscal policies implying that costs for the poor are higher than
the benefits they receive (Lustig, 2018). This panorama has not significantly
changed during the 15-year implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), and despite some achievements, progress was at best uneven
or proved to be unsustainable. Aid actors insisted on interventions targeted at
the poor, while mounting evidence showed that poverty cannot be eliminated
without addressing inequality simultaneously (e.g. UNRISD, 2010).
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development adopted in 2015 set out
to revert these trends and to finally do away with business as usual, seeking innovative and transformative ways to achieve development that is more
inclusive and sustainable. The agenda which lists 17 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) and 169 targets, reflects a broader and more holistic understanding of development compared to its predecessor. Most importantly, it
includes two inequality goals, SDG 5 on gender equality and SDG 10 on
reducing inequality within and among countries (UN, 2015).
In the run-up to the SDGs and since the covenant was agreed, inequality has also increasingly shaped public debates at the national level. Rising
public awareness, advocacy campaigns and social movements (Koehler, 2020)
ushered in new equality-enhancing legislation and policies in several countries. Finally, inequality has recently occupied centre-stage with actors that
had hitherto been less interested in the issue, e.g. the Davos World Economic
Forum and the International Financial Institutions (IFIs) (Lakner et al., 2019;
Ostry et al., 2018; Zattler, 2020).

Hujo

345

While these are positive developments, the prospects for more egalitarian and inclusive policies and outcomes remain uncertain, not only in view
of the current global Covid-19 pandemic and its economic fallout, but also
because of continuing political polarisation and political backlash (EU, 2018;
McIntyre, 1993), hard-wired ideological beliefs and interests underpinning
current aid policies and development strategies, as well as structural drivers in
politics and economics reproducing and further increasing inequalities (e.g.
Milanovic, 2016; UNRISD, 2019; UNCTAD, 2020).
Against this backdrop the question arises how to design and implement
effective policies to reduce inequalities, and which political factors may facilitate their adoption. Another question is whether mainstream development
approaches such as poverty targeting are conducive or detrimental for equality
goals and transformative change.
One of the key instruments to address inequality, poverty and social
exclusion is social protection. Social protection policies, broadly understood
as social insurance, social assistance and labour market policies, protect people
from adverse market effects and lifecycle contingencies while playing important roles for production, reproduction and redistribution (Mkandawire,
2004; UNRISD, 2010, 2016). According to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (1948) social protection is a fundamental human right for all
people. Universal and adequate social protection schemes which are progressively financed redistribute risks, income and resources in ways which favour
groups with lower income, status, or other disadvantages, leading to more
equitable social outcomes and empowerment while also fostering cross-class
coalitions. However, depending on their objectives, design and implementation, social programmes can reinforce inequalities and exclusions or lack
transformative impact.
In this themed journal section, we are presenting three case studies of
contemporary social protection policies, analysing what role they play in
addressing inequalities in the global South, a term that is increasingly used to
designate the diverse group of low- and middle-income countries which have
formally been labelled as developing, emerging, peripheral or Third World
countries. Authors explore which political economy factors have shaped the
decision-making and implementation process of these reforms, providing
critical reflections and corrective narratives on so-called best practices of cash
transfer programmes and how they are operationalised in the Philippines and
in Kenya, questioning assumptions and measures of success, and shedding
light on the sometimes ambiguous if not deceptive use of concepts and terms
in current donor parlance. The third article analyses a policy that receives
less attention from the donor community compared to social assistance minimum wage policy. The South Africa case study in this issue explores
the political process that resulted in the successful introduction of a national
minimum wage in one of the most unequal countries of the world, unpacking

346

C r i t i c a l S o c i a l P o l i c y 41(3)

the role of various institutions and actors and their particular alliances in the
making of this reform.
This introduction aims to establish some common ground for the themed
section by introducing key concepts and questions. It situates the three case
studies in a context of contested but unfettered neoliberal and financialised
globalisation or hyper-globalisation (UNCTAD, 2020), marked by increasing power of elite actors and rising inequalities at multiple levels. The article
highlights contradictions between ambitious global development visions as
embodied in the SDGs or enshrined in donor narratives of pro-poor policies,
and actual policy reforms at the national level; between reform objectives,
consequences and implementation challenges; and between international and
national political economy factors versus institutional legacies in shaping
reform outcomes. Finally, we asked if the social protection reforms studied
have any transformative potential for addressing root causes of poverty and
inequality. The article is divided into six sections; the second section provides a brief historical account of the changing relationship between inequality, social policy and development. The third section explains how inequality
entered the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, a culmination of the
contemporary social turn, while the fourth section discusses the limitations
and opportunities of the social turn. The fifth section analyses the three case
studies in the themed section through the lens of contestations, institutions
and transformative change. The sixth section concludes.

Inequality, social policy and development
There are many reasons why the fight for greater equality was silenced in the
economic discourse for more than three decades. Whereas during the cold war
period, Western welfare states aimed for some equalisation of living standards
through fiscal policy and social bargaining (Esping-Anderson, 1990; Huber
and Stephens, 2014), this social contract started to unravel in the 1980s, and
in an accelerated pace after the fall of the Berlin Wall, giving way to marketoriented reforms in economic and social domains premised on growth and
efficiency objectives.
Developing countries were even harder hit by the systemic overhaul in
the 1980s. State-led development strategies promoting full employment and
public social services adopted by developmentalist governments concerned
with catching-up (typically represented by Latin America and East Asia), as
well as by newly independent states striving to overcome the legacies of colonialism (typically represented by sub-Saharan Africa), were replaced with stabilisation and structural adjustment policies (SAP), what was later called the
Washington Consensus with reference to the powerful US institutions and
international organisations shaping and funding development policy located

Hujo

347

in the city (Williamson, 1990). Donor-led liberalisation, deregulation, privatisation and austerity policies were justified on the grounds of severe debt and
balance of payments crises, but most importantly, legitimised by a general
ideological shift towards market-liberal approaches gaining strength since the
late 1960s.
In this process, the fundamental role of social policy for production, stabilisation and redistribution which had been central in post-war Keynesian economic policy and to a certain extent in post-colonial and late-industrialising
contexts was more and more reduced to a residual function (Mkandawire,
2004). At the same time, the UN’s visionary and humanistic founding remit
based on the UN Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was
less and less influential in shaping policy approaches and donor interventions
(Koehler, 2015).
The failure of the Washington Consensus and the repressive nature of
structural adjustment has been widely documented in the scholarly and policy
literature (e.g. Beckman, 1992; Cornia et al., 1987; Mkandawire and Soludo,
1998). Its impact on economic and social systems in the global South was
nothing less than devastating, as were the social and political consequences.
It became quickly clear that measures enforced by the international creditor community would increase poverty, exclusion and fragmentation, as few
had the monetary means to pay for commercialized social services and user
fees charged for deteriorating public services (Mackintosh and Koivusalo,
2005; Chachage, 2007). Identification of the neediest and most deserving
poor through targeting remained inefficient and ineffective in societies where
poverty was not a problem of the few, but of the many (Mkandawire, 2005).
While this compelling critique of the Washington Consensus’ recipes,
and the lessons learned, did not result in immediate changes in donor practice, it prepared the ground for a comeback of alternative approaches and
social policy into the development discourse, the so-called social turn, as we
lay out in the following section.

The social turn and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development
The social turn can be described as a gradual shift in ideas and policies
which reasserted social issues in development agendas around and after the
UN Social Summit convened in Copenhagen in 1995 (UNRISD, 2016). It
marked a critical juncture in global development debates, opening spaces for
questioning market fundamentalism and bringing back the social dimensions
of development. The United Nations reclaimed the terrain of social policy
from the International Financial Institutions, which led to some reconfigurations of ideational forces in the broader system (see also Koehler, 2015;

348

C r i t i c a l S o c i a l P o l i c y 41(3)

Emmerij et al., 2001). Criticising the dominant residual and market-driven
approach, the Copenhagen Action Agenda called for an integrated approach
linking poverty reduction with social integration and employment creation
(UN, 1995). Further milestones in the building of a new development vision
were the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and the World Conference
on Women in Beijing in 1995, and finally the MDGs, which despite their
narrow focus on aid interventions, helped to direct national and international
funding towards poverty reduction and investments in social sectors.
At the international level, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
can be seen as the most recent culmination of this social (and ecological) turn.
Its progressive remit was also the result of a more inclusive agenda-setting
and negotiation process that allowed civil society, academics and other stakeholders to voice their views on the most pressing global challenges and to
formulate goals for the world as a whole, breaking up the former North-South
divide (e.g. Alonso et al., 2014; Esquivel and Sweetman, 2016; Koehler,
2015). Next to the prominence of environmental goals, bringing the fight
against inequality into the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was
considered one of the big achievements in these negotiations (Koehler, 2015).
The SDGs include goals on vertical and horizontal inequality, with SDG
10 calling for reducing income inequalities within and between countries
(explicitly mentioning both equality of opportunity and outcome in target
10.3), and SDG 5 for reducing gender inequality. Further, SDG 1 on poverty reduction stipulates equal rights to economic resources, basic services,
property, and land (target 1.4), and includes a target to implement social
protection systems and floors (target 1.3), while SDG 16 on peaceful and
inclusive societies mentions equal access to justice for all (16.3) (UN, 2015).
Group-based inequalities and discrimination related to age, ethnicity, race or
religion, location, migrant or refugee status, disability or ill-health, sexual
orientation etc. are addressed in several other goals and targets, making the
agenda the most comprehensive in terms of equality goals in the UN history
(Freistein and Mahlert, 2016).
Social policies are deemed a key instrument for combatting inequalities,
with Goal 10 explicitly mentioning fiscal, wage, and social protection policies for achieving greater equality (target 10.4) and target 5.4 on unpaid care
work referring to public services, infrastructure and social protection policies
as means of implementation. Implementation of the agenda, which relies on a
combination of national budget allocations and international donor commitments for its funding (specified in Goal 17 on Means of Implementation and
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development) is closely
monitored, with the High-Level Political Forum convened annually in New
York functioning as the apex of a global network of review processes, including thematic reviews and voluntary national reviews, and with participation
of a diverse group of stakeholders.

Hujo

349

While the voluntary nature of the SDGs as well as challenges related to
resource mobilization for its implementation are well recognized, a major
additional gap in the agenda is that it is not explicit about the concrete design
and scope of policies or what a transformative policy approach entails, or
under which political and economic conditions they are likely to materialize,
a lacuna this themed section aims to address (Esquivel and Sweetman, 2016;
Koehler, 2015; UNRISD, 2016).

Inequality and social protection: Limitations and
opportunities of the contemporary social turn
The new development consensus that was crafted in 2015 reflects a context
characterized by contradictory dynamics (UNRISD, 2016): on the one hand
the ongoing dominance of market imperatives and fiscal pressures influencing social policy design and undermining its effectiveness, a phenomenon
that has been cast into sharp relief during the current Covid-19 pandemic; on
the other hand democratization, active citizenship and alternative development approaches resurfacing in academic debates (see also Alonso et al., 2014;
Koehler 2015). This meant that the social turn did not imply automatically
transformative change for more democratic, inclusive, equitable and sustainable development.
An important impediment for a transformative social turn was the context of liberalisation and deregulation of trade, financial and capital markets
that gained further ground in the 1990s, preventing countries from adopting
developmental strategies which were more in line with the (social) development histories of today’s advanced economies (Chang, 2003; Mkandawire,
2006), a trend that continued after the 2008 financial crisis and has now
ushered in what UNCTAD calls ‘hyper-globalisation’ (UNCTAD, 2020): the
dominance of private finance and large corporations engaging in rent-seeking activities, and an ideology motivated by neoliberalism, leading to rising
inequalities, extreme levels of debt, heightened insecurity and stalling levels
of investment and structural change.
While the features of this hyper-globalisation process and its skewed
distributional effects were becoming more pronounced over time, their
implications for the global South were rarely addressed in the international
development discourse. The social turn in the mid-1990s coincided with the
promotion of a growth-cum-poverty-reduction model, largely ignoring questions of drivers of growth and structural transformation as well as of employment and social integration which were central in debates at the Copenhagen
Summit. This model shaped development policy and the new global UN
agenda at the turn of the millennium, well exemplified in the MDGs and the
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) of the International Monetary

350

C r i t i c a l S o c i a l P o l i c y 41(3)

Fund (IMF) and World Bank. While the World Bank focused on social sectors, infrastructure and poverty (calling for public-private-partnerships where
state capacity was deemed insufficient, see Van Waeyenberge and Bayliss,
2017), the IMF continued with a business as usual approach in economic
policy, applying macroeconomic orthodoxy and a rejection of substantial
fiscal redistribution in their loan conditionality and country programming,
with detrimental effects for growth, structural change and social development
(Gottschalk, 2015; Mkandawire, 2006; UNRISD, 2016).
This three-tiered approach of growth, efficiency and poverty reduction
has dominated aid interventions and donor practice until today, leading to
a siloed approach regarding the three pillars of sustainable development, the
economic, social and environmental, where the latter two are rather conceived
as add-ons to mainstream economic approaches (UNRISD, 2016). The model
reflects the belief of neoclassical economics that a trade-off between growth
and redistribution exists, arguing for state retrenchment and market-oriented
reforms to spur growth and efficiency even if they negatively affect distributional outcomes. This argument is persistently put forward even by authors
who have emphasized the importance of inequality issues within the Fund, as
can be seen in a recent IMF publication by Ostry et al. (2018: 4): ‘Our (. . .)
message is that distributional consequences of reform do not justify rolling
back the clock and re-regulating economies or scaling down ambitious structural reform agendas’.
Despite widespread criticism, by Keynesian and other heterodox economists, not the least in the aftermath of the 2008 financial meltdown and in
the run-up to the SDGs, this model is astonishingly persistent in contemporary policy thinking and practice, with a real danger that it could also shape
the post-pandemic recovery (see also Kennett and Dukelow, 2018 and UNCTAD, 2020).
The growth-cum-poverty-reduction model based on free-market ideology was, however, not adopted by all countries in the global South: Where
governments decided to venture on to more transformative pathways they
often benefitted from new political constellations and favourable economic
conditions, allowing them to pursue alternative economic strategies and more
inclusive social policies. When progressive governments assumed power in
countries like Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil and Uruguay in the early 2000s, they
could harvest windfalls from the commodity price boom in international markets, which created the necessary fiscal space and growth dynamics to overcome elite resistance and hold interventions of external creditors at bay. Based
on broad political support over several electoral terms, these governments
implemented fundamental structural reforms, such as the renationalisation of
the hydrocarbon sector in Bolivia (Paz Arauco, 2020), the renationalisation of
the pension system in Argentina (Hujo, 2014), the implementation of progressive tax reforms in Argentina and Uruguay (UNRISD, 2016), the creation

Hujo

351

of a national care system in Uruguay (UNRISD, 2016), and the implementation of universal child benefits in Argentina and of universal social pensions
in Bolivia. Brazil, a country that is often portrayed as the international role
model for conditional cash transfers (CCT) with reference to its celebrated
Bolsa Familia programme, is less recognised for other reforms implemented
by the PT (Partido dos Trabalhadores) governments: coverage extension and
wage indexation of various other cash transfer programmes such as social pensions, universalisation of access to education and health services, labour market policies such as minimum wage policy, as well as participatory governance
models and effective social registries (UNRISD, 2016; for a critique of the
Brazilian model see Lavinas et al., 2017).
Thanks to these policies one of the most unequal continents in the world
displayed decreasing vertical and horizontal inequalities and poverty since
2002, though the pace of reduction slowed down after 2014 (the Gini coefficient in Latin America decreased from 0.538 in 2002 to 0.465 in 2018 in
15 countries: ECLAC, 2019; see also Cornia, 2012). However, transformative approaches could not be sustained in all cases. In Brazil and Bolivia, for
example, transformative social policy programmes have proved unsustainable
in the wake of shifts in political power, despite improvements in social outcomes, a development that was certainly influenced by a deteriorating economic situation after the commodity boom ran out of steam post 2011, but
which also reflected unsolved internal contradictions and mounting external
pressures.
Forces unleashed by neoliberal hyper-globalisation, the assumption of a
growth-redistribution trade-off as described above, and the effects of austerity policies regularly adopted in response to the ‘business cycles’ and credit
crunches of the global economy go a long way in explaining the general context
in which the social turn occurred, and why more comprehensive social policy
approaches remained the exception rather than the rule. Indeed, as Ginsburg
et al., (2012) state in the introduction to a themed issue on social policy in the
age of austerity, 'the notion of austerity has been mobilized to legitimate the
roll-out of a further wave of neoliberal social policy' (2012: 297).
An interesting set of political economy literature tries to identify the
structural drivers, ideas, actors, and institutions that account for specific social
policy choices in the global South against this backdrop. While we have mentioned some of the more transformative approaches above, we are interested in
better understanding when and why reforms are reproducing a residual social
policy approach and what the impacts are (Hickey et al., 2018; Mkandawire,
2005, 2006; Ouma and Adésínà, 2019; UNRISD, 2010; Hujo, 2014).
This literature finds for example that power relations play a key role in
the adoption of residual social protection approaches in developing countries.
External actors, such as donors, control policy agendas by inserting experts,
who provide narratives, problem definitions and solutions; by excluding

352

C r i t i c a l S o c i a l P o l i c y 41(3)

political actors or domestic civil society through processes of depoliticisation
whereby policy-making is defined as a technical exercise; and by influencing
preferences of domestic actors through social learning such as training courses,
study tours or conferences (Ouma and Adésínà, 2019). Hickey et al. (2018)
find that the social protection agenda in most African countries has been
strongly influenced by Northern agencies, promoting a culture of individual
rights and specific instruments such as targeted social assistance. Mkandawire
(2006) coined the term of ‘choiceless democracies’ to describe how globalisation and its accompanying ideological predilections and the imposition
and binding nature of economic constraints led to the observed convergence
in economic and institutional reforms, which also conditioned social policy
approaches to a large degree. Nevertheless, in addition to external factors,
domestic politics plays an important role in mediating and redefining donorled policy preferences (Cherrier, 2020; Hickey et al., 2018), whereas in some
cases donor influence is negligible, as this themed section shows.

A political economy approach to social
protection and inequality: Contestation,
institutions, and transformative change in
Kenya, the Philippines and South Africa
The three case studies selected for this themed section are specific illustrations
of the social turn, its opportunities and pitfalls, and highlight both local realities and global interdependencies. Authors apply a political economy lens and
speak to three framing issues – the importance of politics, the role of actors
and institutions, and the transformative impact of reforms.
South Africa, the most advanced country in the sample, is also a country
which tops global rankings in income and wealth inequality (the Gini coefficient was 0.68 in 2017, see also Palma, 2019), has half of its population living
below the national poverty line and a legacy of entrenched racial and genderbased inequalities the post-apartheid ANC (African National Congress) governments have struggled to overcome (Plagerson et al., 2017). South Africa,
similar to Brazil, combines a relatively strong state role in social policy with
a liberal economic approach: while it further expanded and institutionalized
social policies in the democratic transition in line with new constitutional
social rights, it adopted mainstream economic policies biased towards big
capital, financial services and extractive industries. Promoting the country as
a developmental state, rather than a welfare state, policy-making elites proclaim a conservative discourse against redistribution, rooted in assumptions
about a supposed dependency culture that might result from social handouts
(Seekings, 2018). With an expressed preference for work over transfers to

Hujo

353

combat poverty, policymakers have nevertheless failed to tackle persistently
high unemployment rates and labour market segregation.
Kenya, a less unequal country than South Africa (Gini coefficient 0.42 in
2017), was ‘one of the early adopters of cash transfers in the current wave of
social protection uptake on the African continent’ (Ouma and Adésínà, 2019:
377), and has since developed a National Social Protection Policy to operationalise social security rights stipulated in the new Constitution of 2010
(Republic of Kenya, 2011). The Cash Transfer programme for Orphans and
Vulnerable Children (CT-OVC) analysed in this issue was started in 2004 in
response to challenges associated with the HIV/AIDs pandemic, with funding from UNICEF and DFID, covering around 350’000 households by the
end of 2017 and by then financed domestically (Ouma and Adésínà, 2019).
With three other cash transfers subsequently implemented it constitutes the
country’s National Safety Net Programme, reaching approximately 5 million
persons in 2019, around 10 per cent of the population (World Bank, 2019).
Poverty is still high, with 36.1 per cent of the population living below the
global poverty line in 2015/16, but has declined 10 per cent over ten years,
which is associated with the rapid expansion of the new social protection programmes and high average growth rates exceeding 5 per cent annually until
2019 (World Bank, 2020).
The launch of the CCT programme Pantawid in the Philippines in 2008
occurred in a broader context of low economic growth and efforts to reduce
poverty over several decades (Nem Singh et al., 2016). The Pantawid was first
introduced to tackle the overall decline in social expenditure in a context of
high debt service and the international food price crisis, as well as concerns
over the failure to make social progress consistent with the MDGs, while also
establishing institutional patterns of governance independent of votes, political allegiances and clientelism (Nem Singh et al., 2016). Funded by external donors (mainly World Bank and Asian Development Bank), the CCT is
focused on increasing the income and social capital of the poor and to prevent
the intergenerational transmission of poverty by stipulating conditionalities
regarding education and health care service utilisation but did not address
overall inequalities. Critical observers stated early on that a palliative instrument like a CCT was not a substitute for structural reforms: in the context
of highly unequal societies such as the Philippines, reducing poverty also
required changing macroeconomic policies, notably ‘reversing of trade liberalisation, a moratorium on foreign debt payments, and an effective agrarian
reform’ (Bello, 2010).
Several issues and analytical perspectives cut across the three country
studies. Authors hold that revealing the politics of social protection reform
challenges the current donor narrative that social policy is a technical problem-solving device. Instead, it constitutes an arena of contestation and bargaining between different actors characterised by different power resources,

354

C r i t i c a l S o c i a l P o l i c y 41(3)

interests and ideologies. These contestation and bargaining processes are
shaped by specific contexts as described above regarding global agendas and
ideologies, economic trends and crises, and take place between state actors,
business, organised labour or civil society actors, and a variety of external
actors, for example experts, international organisations or donors.
Dadap-Cantal et al. in this issue show that in the Philippine case, the
Pantawid CCT has evolved from an ad-hoc poverty measure into one of the
biggest CCT programmes in the world with 4.3 million households covered
in 2019, and promoted as a best practice in terms of targeting and poverty
reduction. The authors argue, however, that the impact of Pantawid expansion on the broader social protection system has been an increase in fragmentation and stratification, while its primary purpose, identifying the poor and
providing them social protection, remains elusive. The article analyses what
rationales among key domestic and external actors explain the advancement
of a success narrative of the programme, and how external donors and experts
influenced its design and expansion through technical assistance and funding. Authors show how a different narrative was created in which fragmentation of multiple social assistance programmes is seen to be addressed through
improved poverty targeting, leading to better coordination and convergence
among these programmes. This is in contrast to critical analysis which sees
the fragmentation of provisioning across social groups or classes as being exacerbated by targeting compared to universal public provision, or convergence
as the greater integration of social assistance with social security systems, or
as unification in the quality of social provisioning provided across groups.
Francis and Valodia in this issue analyse the political process leading to
the recent introduction of a national South African minimum wage through
the lens of social dialogue, a terminology used by the International Labour
Organisation for a decision-making process which involves organized state,
labour and business actors. The labour market in South Africa is at the heart
of a structural problem of constant production and reproduction of inequalities (62 per cent of persons in the lowest income quintile are unemployed),
a dynamic that one of the most comprehensive social grant systems that has
been established in the global South (around 45 per cent of South African
households are beneficiaries of a social grant) fails to address. The political
economy analysis shows that the wage policy, while incorporating evidencebased advice provided by an advisory panel of experts, was far from being
a technical exercise. Not only was the reform field highly ideologised and
academically contested, but the reform process was also shaped by an increasingly divided labour movement and its changing relationship with government leaders in a context of recurrent violent and protracted strikes.
A second entry point for analysis of the relationship between inequality and social protection in the three case studies is the role of institutions.
Unequal power relations and inequalities are maintained and reinforced

Hujo

355

through formal and informal institutions, including those tasked with social
provisioning and social governance, as well as social norms and practices.
Which kinds of institutional structures and practices are most effective in
moving countries towards greater equality and which ones further entrench
divisions? What is the impact of external models and interventions on social
provisioning systems and institution-building in the global South?
The article by Rohregger et al. in this issue is a case study on the role of
traditional authorities in the delivery of the Kenyan cash transfer CT-OVC.
Authors identify the local political economy as an important mediating arena
for implementing social policies, with informal institutions such as chiefs,
assistant-chiefs and community elders playing an important role in the delivery of the programme, particularly regarding targeting, enrolment, delivery,
monitoring, awareness and information, data collection or grievance and
redress mechanisms. While the involvement of traditional authorities, which
is not stipulated in formal programme regulations, fills in administrative
gaps and reduces transaction costs, they also act as gatekeepers, at times misusing their role for personal benefits and undermining programme objectives.
In the case of the Pantawid cash transfer programme analysed by DadapCantal et al., the national targeting system through the Listahanan social registry, an institution that has received much praise from the donor community
for its efficiency and effectiveness, is scrutinised. A system which was meant
to lead to depoliticisation in benefit allocation and administrative streamlining, has in fact resulted in a quasi-permanent beneficiary base established in
household assessments conducted in 2009, neglecting poverty dynamics in
the country and augmenting inclusion and exclusion errors associated with
targeting. According to the authors, Pantawid and Listahanan have conditioned and structured the policy architecture and institutional modalities of
social protection in the country, increasing promotion and use of povertytargeting systems across the broader social policy systems of the Philippines,
from health and education subsidies to nutrition programmes.
A particular institution of social dialogue, the South African National
Economic Development and Labour Council (Nedlac) in South Africa, is analysed in the article by Francis and Valodia. Authors find that the combination
and interaction of institutional social dialogue under Nedlac with the role of
outside actors and institutions such as an advisory panel established in 2016
was an important condition for the reform to succeed. The article provides an
in-depth analysis of the two key institutions which in combination overcome
a reform impasse: Nedlac, a long-standing institution which reflects the role
of trade unions and of social dialogue in South Africa’s economic strategy
and democratic transition, and the ad-hoc institution of a temporary advisory
panel, which brought key academics and experts into the reform process and
turned it to a certain extent into ‘a text-book case of evidence-based policy’.
The reform also created new institutions such as the National Minimum

356

C r i t i c a l S o c i a l P o l i c y 41(3)

Wage Commission established in January 2019 to monitor implementation
and impact of the policy and to recommend adjustments.
The third entry point for the analysis is to explore the transformative
potential of the reform cases presented in this themed section. Looking at the
South African case study, the question arises whether the recent minimum
wage can be regarded as a first step to attack causal drivers of inequality
emerging from the labour market, which according to the authors is the case.
As intended, wages at the lower end of the wage distribution have increased,
compressing the wage gap without increasing unemployment in 2019. It has
thus provided a wage floor for the most vulnerable workers including women
and black South Africans, reducing vertical and horizontal inequalities which
often cluster in highly unfavourable ways.
In the case of the Philippines, the article argues that the modalities of the
targeted expansion of the Pantawid have undermined its protective functioning, as the system is not able to adapt to changing conditions of poverty. Furthermore, the political reform process reflects a considerable amount of policy
transfer and donor influence in programme design, funding, and implementation, which raises questions about policy autonomy and the shortcomings of
global policy blueprints. The most worrisome finding of the study is probably
that the Pantawid CCT reinforces a residual and fragmented social protection
system with bleak prospects for transforming the structures which reproduce
inequality and poverty in the country, including factors undermining democratic governance and inclusive economic development.
Similar conclusions can be drawn from the analysis of the cash transfer
programme in Kenya, where technocratic administrative approaches towards
programme implementation largely oversaw local realities and institutional
constraints. In order to implement donor-driven targeting mechanisms,
national bureaucracies have to count on the traditional chief system. While
this may enhance programme delivery on the one hand, it may also produce
the opposite effect where local power structures, patronage and rent-seeking
increase inequality and social exclusion. In view of these hybrid institutional
contexts, authors suggest to not discard informal institutions as dysfunctional
from the outset, but to ask the question on how to improve their transformative potential for outcomes which benefit the poor.

Conclusion
The articles in this themed section analyse social protection as a key instrument to address inequality, poverty and social exclusion as part of countries’
national and global development commitments.
A discussion of the general development context and mainstream donor
approaches have shed light on the context in which to understand recent social

Hujo

357

protection reforms. Despite the global commitment to a rights-based, holistic, integrated, and transformative sustainable development agenda, actual
policies and aid practices are all too often reflecting business as usual: marketled growth as a development strategy, residual and targeted social protection measures as social policy, and equality of opportunity instead of equality
of outcomes as social justice policy. Buzzwords such as shared prosperity,
inclusive growth, or growth with equity may reflect a changing discourse,
but assumptions of free and competitive markets rewarding individual effort
and talent, trickle-down growth and a reduced state role loom large. Indeed,
addressing inequalities and promoting inclusion through decent work, universal public social services and social security has dropped out of this development equation, with adverse consequences for social development and the
realization of human rights, in particular substantive economic and social
rights (Hujo and Behrendt, 2017; ILO, 2017; UN Women, 2015).
We have shown that a promising social turn happened around the mid1990s, whereas contradictory developments accompanied this process which
culminated in the SDGs – a visionary and comprehensive agenda, but as
most UN agreements lacking teeth due to its voluntary nature, financing
challenges, as well as entrenched donor practices and path dependencies of
existing policies and legislations at country level. Controversial debates have
emerged in this context, especially around the very limited vision or potential
for transformative change that is embodied in current social protection agendas, if not their possible conservative and even regressive tendencies. Contested issues include the role of the state in social policies; their scope, design,
and financing; and the fundamental values that should underpin them. In
addition, macroeconomic policies and global power asymmetries were not
called into question, which reduced the possibility of social policy playing
a truly transformative role within a reformed economic and political system.
The key findings from the different studies show different possible pathways in an increasingly challenging global environment:
The newly introduced minimum wage law in South Africa bears transformative potential, seeking to address structural labour market inequalities which are identified as one of the factors that reproduce inequalities in
the country. Nevertheless, other economic and social drivers of inequality
are more hard-wired and would require deeper transformative change, for
example high unemployment rates, which are approaching a staggering rate
of 50 per cent during the Covid-19 crisis, and gender-based stereotypes and
discriminations. Cash transfer programmes in Kenya and the Philippines,
introduced in contexts of crisis and the MDG agenda focused on poverty
reduction, suffer from a range of shortcomings undermining their transformative potential, in particular the artificially set cap on beneficiaries, either
through the social registry applied in the Philippines or financing constraints
and targeting mechanisms deployed in Kenya. A second shortcoming is

358

C r i t i c a l S o c i a l P o l i c y 41(3)

longer-term fiscal sustainability, especially as donors are pushing for a gradual
scaling up of the domestic share of funding CCTs in a current environment
with mounting fiscal and debt pressures. A third one is the adverse impact of
CCTs based on poverty targeting on empowerment, social cohesion and the
potential for cross-class and inter-generational alliances (see also Moore and
Seekings, 2019): indeed, one of the implications of the Philippines and Kenya
examples is that whatever institutions are implied in identifying beneficiaries
for pro-poor social programmes, formal or informal, information-technology
based centralized social registries or local authorities, the result is disempowerment and stigmatization of the target population which instead of being
granted universal and unconditional rights for social protection in times of
need remains at the mercy of being identified by someone as deserving of
assistance.
The set of articles presented in this themed section provide a snapshot of
contemporary social protection approaches and their political economy drivers
in a context of heightened inequalities which have become the hallmark of the
current hyper-globalisation era. While the SDGs aim to address broader and
inter-connected development challenges such as poverty, inequality, employment, growth and climate change, development practice continues with
siloed and compensatory approaches from the past. In the current conjuncture
of great uncertainty and crisis unleashed by the Covid-19 pandemic, much
of the residual social turn is exposing its weaknesses, resulting in immense
socio-economic costs and human sufferings. The SDGs were already off track
on many goals and targets before the pandemic, e.g. on eradicating extreme
poverty by 2030, but due to the pandemic and its policy response 71 million
people are projected to fall into poverty in 2020, reversing decades of progress, while inequalities within and between countries are further exacerbated
(UN, 2020). The UN Secretary General Guterres calls to 'hold firm in our
convictions and not let the crisis derail our hopes and ambitions' (UN, 2020:
3). To avoid another lost decade (UNCTAD, 2020) and to succeed with the
project of a better recovery, these hopes and ambitions need to be grounded in
a shared understanding of why current approaches have failed and which policies and structural conditions are at the heart of our problems, an endeavour
to which this themed section aims to contribute.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: The Open Access for
this article was funded by the European Research Council under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, under the AIDSOCPRO research project (Aiding Social Protection: the Political Economy of
Externally Financing Social Policy in Developing Countries; grant agreement
No 638647).

Hujo

359

Note
Earlier versions of the contributions in this themed section were presented
at the UNRISD conference: Overcoming inequalities in a fractured world:
Between elite power and social mobilization (Geneva, November 2018).
References
Alonso JA, Cornia GA and Vos R (2014) Alternative Development Strategies for the Post2015 Era. New York: Bloomsbury.
Bartels LM (2008) Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age.
New York: Russel Sage Foundation and Princeton University Press.
Beckman B (1992) Empowerment or repression? The World Bank and the politics
of adjustment. In: Gibbon P, Bangura Y and Ofstad A (eds), Authoritarianism,
Democracy and Adjustment. The Politics of Economic Reform in Africa. Uppsala: Scandinavian Institute of African Studies, pp. 83–105.
Bello W (2010) The CCT debate and the coalition against the poor. Philippine Daily
Inquirer, 11 April 2010. Available at https://focusweb.org/the-conditional-cashtransfer-debate-and-the-coalition-against-the-poor/, accessed 30.09.2016.
Chachage CSL (2007) Social policy and development in East Africa: The case of education and labour market policies. In: Adésínà J (ed.) Social Policy in Sub-Saharan
African Context. In Search of Inclusive Development. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan and UNRISD, pp. 87–111.
Chancel L (2017) Insoutenables inégalités: pour une justice sociale et environnementale. Paris:
Les Petits Matins.
Chang HJ (2003) Kicking Away the Ladder: Development Strategies in Historical Perspective. London: Anthem Press.
Cherrier C (2020) Domestic resource mobilization for social transfers in sub-Saharan
Africa: Can foreign aid act as a catalyst? In: Hujo K (ed.) The Politics of Domestic
Resource Mobilization for Social Development. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan and
UNRISD.
Cornia GA (2012) Inequality trends and their determinants. Latin America over
1990–2010. UNU-WIDER Working Paper No. 2012/9. Helsinki: UNUWIDER.
Cornia GA, Jolly R and Stewart F (1987) Adjustment with a Human Face: Protecting the
Vulnerable and Promoting Growth. Vol. 1: A Study by UNICEF. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Credit Suisse (2019) Global Wealth Report 2019. Zurich: Credit Suisse AG, Research
Institute.
Dadap-Cantal E, Ramos C and Fischer A (2021) Targeting versus social protection in
Cash Transfers in the Philippines: Reassessing a celebrated case of social protection. Critical Social Policy 41(3).
ECLAC (2019) Social Panorama of Latin America. (LC/PUB.2019/22-P/Rev.1), Santiago: Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean.

360

C r i t i c a l S o c i a l P o l i c y 41(3)

Emmerij L, Jolly R and Weiss TG (2001) Ahead of the Curve? UN Ideas and Global
Challenges. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Esping-Andersen G (1990) The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Esquivel V and Sweetman C (2016) Gender and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Gender & Development 24(1): 1–8.
EU (2018). Backlash in Gender Equality and Women’s and Girls’ Rights. Women’s rights
and gender equality policy. Commissioned by the European Parliament’s Policy
Department for Citizens’ Rights and Constitutional Affairs. Brussels: European
Union.
Francis D and Valodia I (2021) Inequality in the South African labour market: The
political economy of the national minimum wage. Critical Social Policy 41(3).
Freistein K and Mahlert B (2016) The potential for tackling inequality in the Sustainable Development Goals. Third World Quarterly 37(12): 2139–2155.
Gilens M (2012) Affluence and Influence: Economic Inequality and Political Power in America. New York: Russel Sage Foundation and Princeton University Press.
Ginsburg N, Jeffers S and Mooney G (2012) Editorial introduction to themed issue:
Social policy in an age of austerity. Critical Social Policy 32(3): 297–298.
Gottschalk R (2015) The effectiveness of IMF/World Bank-funded poverty reduction
strategy papers. In: Bangura Y (ed.) Developmental Pathways to Poverty Reduction.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan and UNRISD, pp. 74–97.
Hickey S, Lavers T, Niño-Zarazúa M and Seekings J (2018) The negotiated politics
of social protection in sub-Saharan Africa. WIDER Working Paper 34, Helsinki: United Nations University World Institute for Development Economics
Research.
Huber E and Stephens JD (2014) Income inequality and redistribution in post-industrial democracies: Demographic, economic, and political determinants. Socio-Economic Review 12: 245–267.
Hujo K and Behrendt C (guest editors) (2017) Special issue: The human right to
social security. International Social Security Review 70(4).
Hujo K (ed.) (2014) Reforming Pensions in Developing and Transition Countries. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan and UNRISD.
ILO (2017) Building Social Protection Systems: International Standards and Human Rights
Instruments. Geneva: International Labour Office.
Kennett P and Dukelow F (2018) Introduction to themed section. Neoliberalism’s
afterlives: States of neoliberalism, power and resistance in post-crisis societies.
Critical Social Policy 38(3): 453–460.
Koehler G (2015) Seven decades of 'development’. And now what? Journal of International Development 27: 733–751.
Koehler G (2020) Creative coalitions in a fractured world: An opportunity for transformative change? UNRISD Occasional Paper No. 4. Geneva: UNRISD.
Lakner C, Mahler DG, Negre M and Prydz EB (2019) How much does reducing
inequality matter for global poverty? Policy Research Working Paper No. 8869,
Washington DC: World Bank.

Hujo

361

Lavinas L, Gentil D and Cobo B (2017) The controversial Brazilian welfare regime.
UNRISD Working Paper 2017–10. Geneva: UNRISD.
Lustig N (ed) (2018). Commitment to Equity Handbook: Estimating the Impact of Fiscal
Policy on Inequality and Poverty. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Mackintosh M and Koivusalo M (eds) (2005) Commercialization of Health Care: Global
and Local Dynamics and Policy Responses. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan and
UNRISD.
McIntyre S (1993) Backlash against equality: The 'tyranny' of the 'politically correct'.
McGill Law Journal 38(1): 1–63.
Milanovic B (2016) Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalisation.
Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Mkandawire T and Soludo C (eds) (1998) Our Continent, Our Future: African Perspectives on Structural Adjustment. Dakar: International Development Research Centre, Council for the Development of Social Science Research in Africa, Africa
World Press.
Mkandawire T (2004) Social policy in a development context: Introduction. In:
Mkandawire T (ed.) Social Policy in a Development Context. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan and UNRISD, pp. 1–33.
Mkandawire T (2005) Targeting and universalism in poverty reduction. Programme on
Social Policy and Development. Paper 23. Geneva: UNRISD.
Mkandawire T (2006) Disempowering new democracies and the persistence of poverty. Programme on Democracy, Governance and Human Rights. Paper 21. Geneva:
UNRISD.
Moore E and Seekings J (2019) Consequences of social protection on intergenerational
relationships in South Africa: Introduction. Critical Social Policy 39(4): 513–524.
Nem Singh JT, Grugel JB and Hatcher P (2016) The political economy of financing children’s rights through extractive industries in the Philippines. UNRISD
Working Paper 2016-2. Geneva: UNRISD.
Ouma M and Adésínà J (2019) Solutions, exclusion and influence: Exploring power
relations in the adoption of social protection policies in Kenya. Critical Social
Policy 39(3): 376–395.
Ostry JD, Berg A and Kothari S (2018) Growth-equity trade-offs in structural
reforms. IMF Working Paper 18/05. Washington DC: International Monetary
Fund.
Oxfam (2018) Reward work, not wealth. Available at: https://www.oxfam.org/sites/
www.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/bp-reward-work-not-wealth-220118-en.
pdf (accessed 25 January 2018).
Palma JG (2019) Behind the seven veils of inequality. What if it's all about the
struggle within just one half of the population over just one half of the national
income? Development and Change Distinguished Lecture 2018. Development and
Change 50(5): 1133–1213.
Paz Arauco V (2020) Domestic resource mobilization for social development in
Bolivia (1985–2014): Protests, hydrocarbons and a new state project. In: Hujo

362

C r i t i c a l S o c i a l P o l i c y 41(3)

K (ed.) The Politics of Domestic Resource Mobilization for Social Development. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan and UNRISD, pp. 269–303.
Republic of Kenya (2011) National Social Protection Strategy. Nairobi: Ministry of
Gender, Children, and Social Development.
Plagerson S, Hochfeld T and Stuart L (2017) Moving towards redistributive and
transformative social security? Gendered social and economic outcomes in South
Africa. UNRISD Working Paper 2017-11. Geneva: UNRISD.
Rohregger B et al. (2021) The politics of implementation: The role of traditional
authorities in delivering social policies to poor people in Kenya. Critical Social
Policy 41(3).
Seekings J (2018) Inequality, popular attitudes and elite ideology in Africa: The case
of social protection. Paper prepared for the UNRISD Conference: Overcoming
inequalities in a fractured world: Between elite power and social mobilization.
8–9 November 2018, Geneva, Switzerland.
Stiglitz J (2012) The Price of Inequality: The Avoidable Causes and Invisible Costs of
Inequality. New York: Norton.
Therborn G (2013) The Killing Fields of Inequality. Malden, MA: The Polity Press.
UNCTAD (2020) Trade and Development Report 2020: From Global Pandemic to Prosperity for All: Avoiding Another Lost Decade. Geneva: United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development.
UNDP (2019) Beyond Income, Beyond Averages, Beyond Today: Inequalities in Human
Development in the 21st Century. Human Development Report. New York: United
Nations Development Programme.
UNRISD (2010) Combating Poverty and Inequality: Structural Change, Social Policy and
Politics. Geneva: United Nations Research Institute for Social Development.
UNRISD (2016) Policy Innovations for Transformative Change. Implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Geneva: United Nations Research Institute
for Social Development.
UNRISD (2019) Overcoming inequalities in the context of the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. Issue Brief 10. Geneva: United Nations Research Institute
for Social Development.
UN Women (2015) Progress of the World’s Women 2015–2016: Transforming Economies,
Realizing Rights. New York: UN Women.
UN (1995) Report of the World Summit for Social Development. A/CONF. 166/9. New
York: United Nations.
UN (2015) Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. New
York: United Nations.
UN (2020) The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2020. New York: United Nations.
Van Waeyenberge E and Bayliss K (2017) Unpacking the public private partnership
revival. Journal of Development Studies (54)4: 577–593.
Wilkinson R and Pickett K (2009) The Spirit Level: Why Greater Equality Makes Societies Stronger. New York: Bloomsbury Press.

Hujo

363

Williamson J (1990) What Washington means by policy reform. In: Williamson J
(ed.) Latin American Readjustment: How Much has Happened. Washington: Peterson
Institute for International Economics.
World Bank (2019) In Kenya, uplifting the poor and vulnerable through a harmonized national safety net system. Results Briefs, 18 April 2019. Washington DC:
World Bank.
World Bank (2020) Macro Poverty Outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa. April 2020. Washington DC.: World Bank.
World Inequality Lab (2018) World Inequality Report. Available at: http://wir2018.
wid.world/files/download/wir2018-summary-english.pdf (accessed 25 January
2018).
Zattler J (2020) Rising Inequality: What are the Implications for Policymaking at the World
Bank? New York: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.

Author biography
Katja Hujo is Senior Research Coordinator in the Transformative Social Policy Programme at
UNRISD. She studied economics and political science at Eberhard-Karls- University Tübingen, Freie Universität Berlin (FUB) and National University of Córdoba, Argentina, and holds
a doctoral degree in economics from FUB. Katja’s academic work focuses on social policy,
poverty and inequality, South-South Migration as well as sustainable development and public
finance. She has published recently an edited volume on The Politics of Domestic Resource Mobilisation for Social Development (Palgrave Macmillan, 2020) and in the journal Global Social Policy.

