Social protection systems for all
to prevent homelessness
and facilitate access to adequate housing
Social Protection for All Issue Brief

Social protection systems, including floors, play a key
role for the reduction of poverty and inequality and also
contribute to preventing homelessness and facilitating
access to adequate housing.
Homelessness, broadly defined as “living in severely inadequate housing due to a lack of access to minimally
adequate housing” (Busch-Geertsema et al., 2016, p.
125), is a global phenomenon. It affects people in both
urban and rural areas, as well as in developed and developing countries. Causes are diverse and include unemployment and poverty, social and demographic
changes, lack of affordable housing, migration (particularly rural-urban migration, but also related to climate
change, disasters or conflicts), or ill-health. The Special
Rapporteur on Adequate Housing proposes a threedimensional approach anchored in human rights:
 Recognizing that homelessness has both a material
and social aspect: the lack of minimally adequate
housing that would provide a secure place to
establish a family of social relationships and participate in community life;
 Recognizing homelessness as a form of systemic
discrimination and social exclusion; and
 Recognizing those who are homeless as right holders
who are resilient in the struggle for survival and
dignity, and as central agents of the social
transformation necessary for the realization of the
right to adequate housing (UN, 2015).
SDG target 11.1 commits to “ensur[ing] access for all
to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums”. Despite the fact that the
share of the urban population that lives in slums was
halved between 1990 and 2014, the absolute number
has actually increased as urban population growth is
outpacing improvements in slum conditions (UN
ECOSOC, 2018).
The implementation of national social protection systems, including floors, can accelerate progress towards
preventing homelessness and achieving SDG target
11.1. SDG target 1.3 calls for the implementation of
“nationally appropriate social protection systems and
measures for all, including floors”, which play a key role
in reducing and preventing poverty and ensuring access
to decent living and working conditions. The ILO Social
Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202)
highlights in particular the key role of nationally defined
social protection floors in guaranteeing at least a basic
level of income security and effective access to essential
health care for ensuring life in dignity.

November 2019

In preparation for the 58th session of the Commission for
Social Development in February 2020, this note
sketches out the role of social protection in achieving
progress towards preventing homelessness, including by
addressing some of its root causes, and promoting access to adequate, safe and affordable housing. In particular, the note highlights how universal social protection systems that are developed in accordance with
human rights principles and ILO social security standards can contribute to preventing homelessness and facilitating access to adequate, safe and affordable housing.

Key points

 Social protection is the set of policies designed

to reduce and prevent poverty and vulnerability
throughout the life cycle, which contributes to
preventing homelessness.

 Universal social protection has a key role in
achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and in particular SDG target 1.3 on
“social protection systems and measures for all,
including floors” and SDG target 11.1 on adequate, safe and affordable housing.

 Social protection systems for all address multi-

ple, often interrelated and complex causes of
homelessness by preventing poverty, contributing to health-related goals, gender equality,
decent work, and reducing inequalities. Moreover, they are gender-sensitive and responsive
to special needs, for instance for people with a
disability.

 ILO standards are an integral part of the internationally agreed framework for the development of universal social protection systems.

 Universal social protection encompasses three
aspects:

 Universal coverage in terms of persons protected;

 Comprehensive protection in terms of risk
covered; and

 Adequacy of the protection provided.
 Well designed and implemented social protec-

tion systems ensure coordination with other policies that address homelessness outside the
immediate area of social security, for example
wage, employment and investment policies.

2

Leaving no one behind: Social protection in
the 2030 Agenda
Social protection is the set of policies designed to reduce and prevent poverty and vulnerability throughout
the life cycle, and to realize the human right to social
security. Social protection includes cash and in-kind
benefits for children and families, maternity, unemployment, employment injury, sickness, old-age, disability,
survivors, as well as health protection. Typically, social
protection systems are implemented through a mix of
contributory schemes (social insurance) and tax-financed schemes (social assistance). Over the past years,
many countries have achieved significant extension of
social protection coverage. However, 55 percent of the
world’s population are not protected at all, and many
more are inadequately protected (ILO, 2017a).
Universal social protection has a central role in achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (see
Figure 1). Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 1 (End
poverty in all its forms everywhere) sets, among others,
the target to “implement nationally appropriate social
protection systems and measures for all, including
floors, and by 2030 achieve substantial coverage of the
poor and vulnerable” (SDG target 1.3).
In addition, universal social protection contributes to
achieving other SDGs, in particular universal health coverage (target 3.8), gender equality (target 5.4), decent
work and economic growth (target 8.5), reduced inequalities (target 10.4), and effective, accountable and
transparent institutions (target 16.6). Social protection
can also facilitate access to adequate sanitation (target
6.2) and contribute to ensuring access to adequate, safe
and affordable housing (target 11.1).

Social Protection Systems for All to Prevent Homelessness

Universal social protection systems, including
floors, to prevent homelessness and facilitate
access to adequate housing
Homelessness is a complex phenomenon that can be
caused by multiple, sometimes overlapping reasons at
the individual and structural level. Among the risk factors are poverty and unemployment, lack of affordable
housing, ill-health, old-age, domestic violence or relationship breakdowns. Many of these factors are addressed by well-designed and implemented social protection systems, and in particular social protection
floors. In addition to addressing risk factors, social protection systems contribute to alleviating adverse consequences of homelessness and to facilitating access to
adequate housing.

Preventing poverty
Social protection systems, including floors, are an important component of public policies to prevent poverty,
by protecting people from adverse financial consequences of life cycle events such as unemployment, ill
health, disability or maternity, and ensuring at least a
basic level of income security throughout the life cycle,
including for children and older persons (ILO 2017a,
ILO and UNICEF, 2019). This is part of the basic social
security guarantees that constitute a nationally-defined
social protection floor, aimed at preventing or alleviating
poverty, vulnerability and social exclusion.
In view of the important role of social protection for the
prevention of poverty, it is not surprising that there is a
negative association between countries’ investment in
social protection (including health) and the percentage
of the population that is living on less than $3.2 per day
(see Figure 2).

Figure 1: Social protection systems and access to housing in the SDGs

Social Protection Systems for All to Prevent Homelessness

3

Figure 2: Social protection expenditure (including health,
percentage of GDP) and percent of population living on
less than $3.2 per day, latest available years

PERCENT OF POPULATION LIVING ON LESS THAN $3.2 PER DAY

100
90

Preventing homelessness
In addition to reducing and preventing poverty in general, social protection systems, including floors, also
have a specific role to play with regard to preventing
homelessness and facilitating access to adequate housing.
Social protection systems directly address some of the
risk factors for homelessness and inadequate housing,
such as poverty (particularly through social assistance
and housing benefits, unemployment (through unemployment protection and social assistance), ill-health
(through health protection and long-term care), and oldage (through old-age pensions). More generally, the important role of social protection systems in guaranteeing
at least a basic level of income security and effective
access to health care is essential for preventing homelessness and inadequate housing.

80
70
60
50
40
30

While internationally comparable data on different aspects of homelessness and inadequate housing are limited, SDG indicator 11.1.1 provides an important indication of the challenge to be met.

20
10
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

PUBLIC SOCIAL PROTECTION EXPENDITURE (INCLUDING
HEALTH) AS PERCENTAGE OF GDP
Source: World Social Protection Report 2017-2019 (ILO, 2017a)
and PovcalNet (World Bank, 2019, data accessed in May 2019).
Note: Percent of population living on less than $3.2 per day in
2011 PPP. Data available for 141 countries. R2=0.528.

Social protection systems do not only alleviate poverty,
but also promote decent employment and inclusive
growth and are an integral part of decent work. They
contribute to strengthening human capabilities, particularly in the transforming world of work, enhancing employability and the productivity of workers, facilitating
job search, enhancing skills and labour market participation, and enable people to better navigate life and
work transitions, including from school to work for young
people. These are important policies to prevent poverty,
including working poverty, contribute to preventing
homelessness and enabling access to adequate housing.
Moreover, effective access to essential health care is a
critical component of social protection floors. Individuals should have access to a nationally defined set of
goods and services that constitutes essential health
care, including prevention and treatment for common
diseases, special health-care needs and maternity care
(ILO, 2019a). Social protection floors should be designed in a way that ensures that persons in need of
health care should not face hardship and an increased
risk of poverty due to the financial consequences of accessing essential health care (Recommendation No.
202, para. 8a). Policies that ensure universal health
coverage in line with these principles are indispensable
in preventing health-related poverty, which often also
manifests itself in poor housing and homelessness.

Countries with higher effective social protection coverage tend to perform better with regard to housing. Figure
3 shows a negative correlation between SDG indicator
1.3.1, that is the share of the population that is covered
by at least one social protection benefit (including sickness benefits, unemployment benefits, old-age benefits,
employment injury benefits, family/child benefits and
survivors’ benefits) and SDG indicator 11.1.1, that is
the share of the urban population that lives in slums,
informal settlements, or inadequate housing.

How should social protection systems be
designed to prevent homelessness and
facilitate access to adequate housing?
The right to housing as part of the right to an adequate
standard of living is, as the right to social security, recognized in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights
(1948) and in the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (1966).
The right to social security can contribute to the right to
adequate housing by means of universal social protection systems that are designed and implemented in accordance with international human rights instruments
and ILO social security standards, which are an integral
part of the internationally agreed framework for the development of social protection systems (ILO, 2017b). In
particular, ILO Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202) and the Social Security (Minimum
Standards) Convention, 1952 (No. 102) are the cornerstones for developing universal social protection systems.
These standards can provide important guidance with
regard to making social protection systems, including
floors, more effective in preventing homelessness and

4

First, national social protection systems should guarantee a nationally-defined social protection floor that is at
least a basic level of social security for all, throughout
the life cycle, including effective access to essential
health care and income security. Second, national social
protection systems should be further strengthened by
the progressive achievement of higher levels of protection to ensure adequate protection. According to this
framework, universal social protection encompasses
three key aspects:

 universal coverage in terms of persons protected;
 comprehensive protection in terms of risks covered;
 adequacy of protection.
In addition, given the complexity of the challenges of
homelessness and inadequate housing, it is essential
that social protection policies are embedded in a
broader policy approach that also considers coordination
with other social, economic and employment policies,
and finds policy solutions that are adapted to each country’s context.

Universal coverage
According to ILO Recommendation No. 202, nationallydefined social protection floors guarantee at least a
basic level of social security for everyone throughout his
or her life course, ensuring that all in need can effectively access social protection. These guarantees should
cover at least all residents and all children, subject to
other international obligations.
Social protection systems should promote the principles
of social inclusion (including of persons in the informal
economy) and respect for people’s rights and dignity;
and respect the principles of non-discrimination, gender
equality and responsiveness to special needs. The latter
points are also important in light of findings that the
experience of homelessness may vary for different
groups in the population, for example men and women
(Johnson et al., 2018), but also persons with special
needs such as living with a disability (ILO and IDA,
2019).
Universal social protection does not stop at a basic level
of protection. Recommendation No. 202 also sets out
that countries should progressively ensure higher levels
of social security for as many people as possible and as
soon as possible.

Adequacy of protection
Universal social protection needs to be adequate to
achieve the expected policy outcomes. ILO social security standards provide a framework of internationally accepted minimum standards to social protection systems.

Figure 3: Effective social protection coverage (SDG
indicator 1.3.1) and urban population living in slums
(SDG indicator 11.1.1), 2014/2015
90

PERCENT OF URBAN POPULATION LIVING IN SLLUMS, 2014

facilitating access to adequate housing. While few ILO
standards explicitly refer to housing and homelessness,
it contains a number of important elements that should
guide the implementation of policies at the national, regional and global level.

Social Protection Systems for All to Prevent Homelessness

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
0

20

40

60

80

100

PERCENT OF THE TOTAL POPULATION COVERED BY AT
LEAST ONE SOCIAL PROTECTION BENEFIT (EFFECTIVE
COVERAGE), 2015
Source: ILO World Social Protection Report 2017-2019 (ILO, 2017a)
and UN-Habitat (2019, data accessed in May 2019).
Note: SDG indicator 1.3.1: Population covered by at least one social
protection benefit (effective coverage): Proportion of the population
receiving at least one contributory or non-contributory cash benefit,
or actively contributing to at least one social security scheme.
SDG indicator 11.1.1: Proportion of urban population living in slums:
Includes also informal settlements or inadequate housing. Data
available for 32 countries. R2=0.555.

Nationally-defined social protection floors play a particularly important role in this respect, as they should prevent or at least alleviate poverty, vulnerability and social
exclusion. They should guarantee access to a set of necessary goods and services that allow life in dignity (Recommendation No. 202, paras. 4 and 8). These necessary goods and services should respond to the need for
adequate housing and basic services, which are reflected in the minimum core content of the human right
to social security. This consists of a minimum essential
level of benefits that enables individuals and families to
“acquire at least essential health care, basic shelter and
housing, water and sanitation, foodstuffs, and the most
basic forms of education” (CESCR, 2008, para. 59a).
These guarantees can be provided through different
means, including benefits in cash and in kind, and
through close coordination of social protection policies
with other policies, such as labour market, employment
and wage policies (see below). In fact, many countries
take into account housing needs in the definition of their
national social protection floor (ILO, 2019a).
In addition to providing guidance regarding adequate
benefit levels, ILO social security standards also set out

Social Protection Systems for All to Prevent Homelessness

key principles for the design and delivery of social protection, such as the predictability of benefits, or nondiscrimination, gender equality and responsiveness to
special needs. This may include specific measures to
ensure the effective access for marginalized or vulnerable categories of the population, including with regard
to awareness-raising and information about benefit entitlements, decentralized structures to facilitate access
to benefits and services and active outreach strategies.

Comprehensive protection
Universal social protection requires comprehensive protection in case of a broad set of social risks and contingencies. Such comprehensive protection should encompass in particular the core areas of social protection
systems, including sickness benefits, unemployment
benefits, old-age benefits, employment injury benefits,
child or family benefits, maternity benefits, invalidity/disability benefits and survivor benefits. These are reflected in Convention No. 102 and Recommendation No
202., as well as in SDG targets 1.3 on social protection
systems, including floors and 3.8 on universal health
coverage. As causes of homelessness are diverse and
may overlap, comprehensive protection ensures that
multiple risks that different population groups may face
over their life cycle are addressed in an integrated way.

Coordination and coherence with other social,
economic and employment policies
Recommendation No. 202 calls on States to ensure coordination within social protection systems, and between social protection policies and other policy areas.
Equally, the Commission on the Status of Women emphasized the need for policy coherence in order to ensure that social protection systems, public services and
infrastructure policies are complementary (UN, 2019).
Policies to address homelessness and affordable housing policies are case in point, as States often use multiple instruments and policies that share social policy objectives. In OECD countries, key services for homeless
people include social housing provision, social protection, and specialist and emergency interventions (OECD,
2015). Needs for coordination exist for instance between unemployment or social assistance benefits,
housing allowances, and employment programmes. This
requires a coordinated approach among the responsible
institutions to deliver adequate benefits and high-quality services.
It is essential to consider a coherent policy approach
with labour market, employment, wage and broader
macro-economic policies. For example, effective (minimum) wage policies play an important role in enabling
people to afford adequate housing (ILO, 2019b). In
some contexts, public employment programmes may
also contribute to ensuring employment opportunities
and facilitating access to adequate, safe and affordable
housing. Comprehensive housing policies should include appropriate policies to ensure adequate, safe and
affordable housing for workers, in line with the guidance

5

provided by the ILO Workers' Housing Recommendation,
1961 (No. 115).
In addition, investment policies for housing should also
take into account considerations regarding decent work,
ensuring that rights at work including social protection
are guaranteed to all workers involved in the construction and maintenance of housing in line with international labour standards. The Global Commission on the
Future of Work (2019) also points to the need for strategic investment and infrastructure policies that can
contribute to a human-centred agenda for the future of
work.

No one-size-fits-all model
In view of the diversity of national experiences with regard to homelessness and inadequate housing, countries
may choose for different policy approaches to tackle
homelessness depending on the scope and magnitude
of homelessness, or depending on the needs of people
who are homeless (OECD, 2015).
Equally, there is no one-size-fits-all model to build social protection systems, as the focus is on the outcome
rather than on the means. Recommendation No. 202
clearly specifies that social protection floors should be
nationally defined, and that countries should consider
“the most effective and efficient combination of benefits and schemes in the national context.” Likewise, they
should consider different methods to mobilize the necessary resources.

Promoting universal social protection
The international human rights framework, international social security standards and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development set out a clear internationally
agreed framework for achieving universal social protection.
The Global Partnership for Universal Social Protection
to Achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
(USP2030) calls on all countries to live up to their commitment to develop nationally owned social protection
systems for all, including floors. It calls upon countries
and development partners to undertake the following
five actions, to support the global commitment on universal social protection:
•

•

•

ACTION 1. Protection throughout life cycle: Establish universal social protection systems, including floors that provide adequate protection throughout the life cycle, combining social insurance, social assistance and other means, an-chored in national strategies and legislation.
ACTION 2. Universal coverage: Provide universal
access to social protection and ensure that social
protection systems are rights-based, gender-sensitive and inclusive, leaving no one behind.
ACTION 3. National ownership: Develop social
protection strategies and policies based on nation-

6

•

•

Social Protection Systems for All to Prevent Homelessness

al priorities and circumstances in close cooperation with all relevant actors.
ACTION 4. Sustainable and equitable financing:
Ensure the sustainability and fairness of social protection systems by prioritizing reliable and equitable forms of domestic financing, complemented by
international cooperation and support where necessary.
ACTION 5. Participation and social dialogue:
Strengthen governance of social protection systems
through institutional leadership, multi-sector coordination and the participation of social partners
and other relevant and representative organizations, to generate broad-based support and promote the effectiveness of services.

Many countries have already achieved significant progress with regard to achieving universal social protection for at least one area of their social protection system. This includes most high-income countries, as well
as a growing number of middle- and low-income countries, including Argentina, Cabo Verde, China, Georgia,
Lesotho, Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal, South Africa and
Uruguay (see country briefs on www.usp2030.org and
Ortiz et al., 2018).
However, more efforts are needed to expand coverage
and ensure comprehensive and adequate social protection for all, to prevent homelessness and facilitate access to adequate, safe and affordable housing, including
for marginalized and vulnerable groups. Such efforts of
national and local governments are essential to “re-engage and recommit to their role of providing social protection and ensuring access to affordable housing for
marginalized and vulnerable groups, reaffirming that
housing is a human right rather than a commodity” (UN,
2015, p. 22).
Closer policy coordination between national social protection policies and other policies relevant to the provision of adequate, safe and affordable housing are necessary to ensure policy coordination and an effective
allocation of resources, as to ensuring that no one is left
behind.

References
Busch-Geertsema, V.; Culhane, D.; Fitzpatrick, S. (2016) “Developing a global framework for conceptualising and measuring
homelessness“, in Habitat International, Vol. 55, pp. 124132.
Global Commission for the Future of Work (2019) Work for a
brighter future. Geneva: ILO.
ILO (2017a) World Social Protection Report 2017-2019. Universal social protection to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals. Geneva: International Labour Office.
ILO (2017b) Building social protection systems: International
standards and human rights instruments. Geneva: ILO.
ILO (2019a) Universal social protection for human dignity, social
justice and sustainable development. Geneva: ILO.
ILO. (2019b) Minimum wage policy guide. Geneva: International
Labour Office.
ILO and IDA (2019) Joint statement. Towards inclusive social protection systems supporting the full and effective participation
of persons with disabilities.
ILO and UNICEF (2019) Towards universal social protection for
children: Achieving SDG 1.3. Geneva and New York: ILO and
UNICEF.
Johnson, G.; Ribar, D.C.; Zhu, A. (2018) “Women’s homelessness: International evidence on causes, consequences, coping, and policies”, in Averett, S.L. et al. (eds): Oxford handbook of women and the economy (Oxford, Oxford University
Press), pp. 799-824.
OECD (2015) Integrating social services for vulnerable groups:
Bridging sectors for better service delivery. Paris, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Ortiz, I., Schmitt, V. and De, L. (2018) 100 years of social protection: The road to universal social protection systems and
floors. Volume I: 50 country cases. Geneva: ILO.
UN (2015) Report of the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing
as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living,
and on the right to non-discrimination in this context
(A/HRC/31/54). New York: United Nations.
UN (2019) Social protection systems, access to public services
and sustainable infrastructure for gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, Agreed Conclusions of the
63rd Session of the UN Commission on the Status of Women
(E/CN.6/2019/L.3). New York: United Nations.
UN CESCR (2008) General Comment No. 19: The right to social
security (Art. 9 of the Covenant), E/C.12/GC/19. Geneva:
United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights.
UN ECOSOC (2018) Progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals. Report of the Secretary General.
E/2018/64. New York: United Nations Economic and Social
Council.
UN-Habitat (2019) UN-Habitat Urban Data. Nairobi, UN-Habitat.
USP2030 (2019) Together to Achieve Universal Social Protection
by 2030 – a Call to Action (Global Partnership for Universal
Social Protection).
World Bank (2019) PovcalNet, Washington: World Bank.

This issue brief was prepared by Mira Bierbaum and Christina Behrendt, with inputs from Valérie Schmitt. The
authors would like to thank the participants of the Expert Group Meeting on “Affordable housing and social
protection systems for all to address homelessness”, United Nations Office at Nairobi, 22-24 May 2019 for a
very constructive discussion.
The editor of the series is the Director of the ILO Social Protection Department, International Labour Office,
4, route des Morillons, 1211 Genève 22, Switzerland.
Visit our websites: www.social-protection.org; www.ilo.org.

