Empowered lives. Resilient nations.

United Nations Development Programme

LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND:
A SOCIAL PROTECTION PRIMER FOR PRACTITIONERS

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION		

6

Why a Social Protection Primer for Leaving No One Behind?

8

Who is this Primer for? Where would it be useful?

11

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK: APPROACH AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES
OF SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

12

What is social protection?

14

Why do we need social protection to achieve sustainable development?

16

Guiding principles of social protection for sustainable development

21

UNDP’S WORK ON SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

24

The added value of UNDP in social protection

26

What can UNDP do to support social protection in my country?

28

POLICY COHERENCE: TOWARDS A SYSTEM OF SOCIAL PROTECTION

32

Overview of programmes and policies

34

Assessment Based National Dialogues: Building coherent national
social protection strategies

37

Linking programmes: A systemic view

38

Universal vs. targeted social protection programmes

41

Unified social registries

42

1

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

2

REACHING THOSE LEFT BEHIND: MAKING SOCIAL PROTECTION INCLUSIVE

44

Reaching all that need to be reached: Expanding coverage

46

Sensitization of social protection: Addressing needs and overcoming barriers

46

MAKING THE LINK BETWEEN SOCIAL PROTECTION AND ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY		

54

Social protection and the sustainable use of natural resources

56

Social protection and climate risk

62

FUNDING AND RAISING RESOURCES FOR SOCIAL PROTECTION

70

Is social protection affordable?

72

Financing mechanisms

72

ANNEXES
Annex 1. Letter from UNDG Chair and ILO Director General to all UN Resident
Co-ordinators and UN Country Teams

75

Annex 2. Glossary		

73

Annex 3. Targeting approaches and Mechanisms

78

Annex 4. References

82

FOREWORD
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as reflected in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), is
about balancing the three dimensions of sustainable development: the economic, social and environmental.
Underlying the Agenda is the powerful commitment to leave no one behind and to reach those farthest
behind first.
The level of ambition of Agenda 2030 points to a paradigmatic shift—an aspiration to improve the lives of
every single person in the world. The eradication of poverty entails going beyond a narrow focus on providing
individuals with the specific needs they lack, towards a systemic view that aims to remove the structural drivers
that prevent individuals from living the lives they value. This shift requires looking at development policy in a
different light and focusing on tools that advance people’s well-being by tackling the interconnected issues
that result in poverty and deprivations.
Social protection systems that are inclusive and risk-sensitive can be a powerful tool to fulfil this commitment.
By advancing human rights and tackling inequalities, exclusion, vulnerability and deprivations, social
protection is a means to reach those left furthest behind. The experience with the MDGs has shown that
growth alone cannot guarantee the eradication of poverty and reduction in inequalities. Even when growth
lifts the incomes of millions of people, it does not necessarily lift all incomes, particularly those of the
poorest, unless explicit policies are implemented with this aim. It is now evident that poverty reduction
efforts are not likely to be sustainable unless the underlying drivers of poverty such as exclusion and
vulnerability are tackled.
The momentum for expanding social protection has been building in recent years. In 2009, the UN System’s
Chief Executive Board for Co-ordination (CEB) launched the Social Protection Floor initiative, which was
endorsed by member states in the Rio+20 Conference on Sustainable Development. The commitment to
social protection is also embedded in the SDGs, not only as a specific target (Target 1.3) which calls for the
“implementation of nationally-appropriate social protection systems and measures for all, including social
protection floors”, but also as a feature in Goals 3, 5 and 10. In addition social protection is one of the pillars of
decent work and is therefore featured in Goal 8, and more specifically Target 8.5.
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda also includes a commitment to delivering social protection and essential
public services for all. The “new social compact” calls for the provision of “fiscally sustainable and nationally
appropriate social protection systems and measures for all, including floors, with a focus on those furthest
below the poverty line and the vulnerable, persons with disabilities, indigenous persons, children, youth and
older persons.” 1 The 2015 Human Development Report recognizes extending social protection as key policy
strategy for enhancing human development through work.
UNDP has been an important partner to national and local governments in efforts to articulate and implement
social protection for sustainable development. The cross-sectoral scope of UNDP’s work has positioned
it as a key player in advancing policy dialogues concerning social protection, generating evidence and
bringing together relevant partners. UNDP has also played an important part in extending social protection
programmes, reforming them, fostering innovation, transferring know-how across countries, and working
closely with traditionally excluded communities to ensure that their voices are represented and their needs
addressed. As the UN’s lead agency for sustainable development, UNDP is also well placed to support countries
in integrating environmental sustainability policies into social protection.

1

United Nations, 2015. Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development (Addis
Ababa Action Agenda). Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 27 July 2015. Paragraph 12.

3

This Primer is intended to provide UNDP Country Offices, programme staff and relevant partners with a practical
resource on ways to strengthen social protection to address the systemic and interlinked objectives of the
Sustainable Development Agenda. It articulates and highlights some lessons learned from the countries that
are leading the way in thinking about social protection in the context of sustainable development. Ensuring
that no one is left behind is not just about transferring resources that push people above the poverty line, it is
also about ensuring that people have the freedom, opportunities and access to live the lives they value. Social
protection, when designed and implemented from a social inclusion perspective, is an important means to
fulfil this commitment.

Magdy Martínez-Solimán
Assistant Secretary General
Assistant Administrator and Director
Bureau for Policy and Programme Support
United Nations Development Programme

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

4

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This Primer is a product of the Sustainable Development Cluster in the Bureau for Policy and Programme
Support of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
The preparation of the Primer was led by Almudena Fernandez and Babatunde Omilola from the Development
Planning and Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Team. The Primer benefited from the supervision and direction
of Nik Sekhran, Director and Chief of Profession of the Sustainable Development Cluster. The Primer was
prepared under the overall guidance of Magdy Martinez-Soliman, United Nations Assistant Secretary General,
UNDP Assistant Administrator and Director of the Bureau for Policy and Programme Support.
Many UNDP colleagues and experts contributed to the substantive shaping of the Primer. They include:
Barbara Auricchio, Luisa Bernal, Amara Bou, Nathalie Bouche, Lotte Dreighe, Maria Cruz Gonzalez, Gail Hurley,
Atif Khurshid, Entela Lako, Guillermina Martin, Sheila Marnie, Holly, Mergler, Tenzin Keyzom Ngodup, Renata
Nowak-Garmer, Jasmina Papa, Gonzalo Pizarro, Caroline Petersen, Wilmot Reeves, Renata Rubian, Kazuyuki
Uji, Bui Viet Hien, Claudia Vinay, Douglas Webb, and Yuqiong Zhou. Several colleagues also provided valuable
input through their participation at a workshop held in November 2015 in New York to validate the framework
and content of the Primer. These colleagues include: Shantanu Mukherjee, Simona Marinescu, Massimiliano
Riva, Bushra Al-Shirae, Sarah Renner and Devika Iyer.
The Primer benefited from extremely valuable and constructive comments from external peer-reviewers. The
external peer-reviewers include Isabel Ortiz and Valerie Schmitt (from ILO), and Hideki Mori, Ruslan Yemtsov
and Kathy Lindert (from the World Bank).
Critical operational support was provided by Khin Khin Kyaw (UNDP), Sohaila Abdulali and Georgina Wilde,
who edited the Primer, and Kimberly S. Koserowski, who was the designer. Their contributions are thankfully
acknowledged.

5

INTRODUCTION

“
Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

6

Agenda 2030 is ambitious and
achievable. It is integrated
and universal. It recognizes
that poverty and hunger
have complex and
interconnected root causes.
We made our promise.
Now it is time for action.

”

Secretary General Ban Ki-moon
Opening Ceremony for World Food
Day at Milan Expo

1

1.1

Why a Social Protection Primer for Leaving No One Behind?

Social protection has gained significant traction around the world. A wide body of evidence in the past few
decades strongly suggests that social protection programmes can be effective tools to reduce poverty and
inequality, increase human capital and protect men, women, girls and boys from risks. The combination of
this growing evidence base, and growing political will, has stimulated an appetite for implementing social
protection programmes in virtually every country around the world.
UNDP has been a key player in assisting governments in developing countries in designing and implementing
social protection programmes and projects. As this note was being finalized in 2016, roughly 133 UNDP
projects in more than 50 countries were related to social protection.2
However, there is much more to be done in terms of social protection. Across the board, social protection
programmes in place are not enough. Certain groups are systematically left behind. Gender stereotypes and
traditional roles are either left intact or reinforced. Too often there is no continuation of protection across the
life cycle of individuals. Programmes are fragmented. The design and implementation of programmes does
not take account of the changing environment and its environmental impacts. The underlying and structural
drivers of deprivations, including social norms, institutions, and agency, are often left unchanged. Funding is
limited and recurrently cut in times of economic contraction.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

8

Traditionally, social protection has been conceptualized as a poverty reduction strategy focused on fulfilling
the unmet material needs, such as income, health and education, of individuals and households. This
approach emphasizes the individual characteristics and circumstances of men and women as the drivers of
deprivation, and often ignores other interlinked and reinforcing patterns, such as social norms, institutions
and environmental factors, which produce deprivations and exclusion.
Sustainable development is a multidimensional concept that encompasses social, economic and
environmental dimensions, and strives for social inclusion and the removal of barriers for individuals to
achieve the life they value.3 In that sense, it focuses on both the individual characteristics and the structural
constraints that drive the deprivations faced by women, men, girls and boys. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development is a paradigm shift in how we think and act towards development. It is a shared
vision for humanity and the basis of a new social contract where no one is left behind, and the furthest
behind are reached first. This requires breaking out of the silos in the way we approach development and
moving beyond singular thematic approaches. It also requires strengthening the relationship between
duty bearers and rights-holders.
As the world aligns national priorities with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), we have an
unprecedented opportunity to position social protection not only as a specific target (Target 1.3), and as a
feature in Goals 3, 5 and 10, but as a critical tool to simultaneously achieve progress in many fundamentally
interlinked Goals and Targets. In addition, social protection is one of the pillars of decent work and is therefore
featured in Goal 8, and more specifically Target 8.5.

2
3

UNDP 2016.
Social exclusion is defined as the “denial of full personhood and full citizenship to certain groups on the basis of who they are, where
they live, or what they believe.” (Kabeer 2010)

figure 1.1 social protection as featured in the sustainable development goals

1.3
Implement nationally appropriate social protection
systems and measures for all, including floors, and
by 2030 achieve substantial coverage of the poor
and the vulnerable

3.8
Achieve universal health care coverage, including
financial risk protection, access to quality essential
health-care services and access to safe, effective,
quality and affordable essential medicines and
vaccines for all

5.4
Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic
work through the provision of public services,
infrastructure and social protection policies and
the promotion of shared responsibility within
the household and the family as nationally
appropriate

10.4
Adopt policies, especially fiscal, wage
and social protection policies, and
progressively achieve greater equality

8.5
By 2030, achieve full and productive employment
and decent work for all women and men, including
for young people and persons with disabilities, and
equal pay for work of equal value

Source: UN 2015.

Aligning social protection to the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda implies thinking about social
protection from an equity perspective, as a tool that has the potential simultaneously to address many drivers
of exclusion and deprivation. If designed and conceptualized in this manner, social protection will not only
directly contribute to SDG 1, but will also contribute to the agenda as a whole.

9

figure 1.2 sample of social protection’s impact on the sustainable development goal 4 56

1

Social protection accounts for an 8 per cent decrease in
the poverty headcount ratio, and a 15 per cent decrease in
the poverty gap. (World Bank 2015b).

South Africa’s non-contributory
grants have reduced the poverty gap by
more than one-third (ILO 2015b).

2

Households receiving transfers average significantly
higher spending on and consumption of food. The impact
of cash transfers on hunger has been most pronounced
in lower-income countries (LICs)
where poverty is generally more severe. In these
settings, households receiving additional income
are particularly likely to prioritize spending on
improving the quantity and or/quality of food
consumed (DFID 2011).

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

10

3

In Rwanda, following the introduction of CBHI, utilization
of health care increased from 31
per cent in 2003 to 107 per cent
in 2012.3 Pregnant women in
Peru, enrolled in cash transfer, are more likely
to have doctor-assisted deliveries.

4

Beneficiaries of Mexico’s Progresa had higher school
enrolment, less grade repetition
and better grade progression,
lower dropout rates, and higher
school re-entry rates among dropouts,
particularly in rural areas.

5

In Brazil, the labour participation rate
of women beneficiaries from Bolsa
Familia is 16 per cent greater than for
women in similar non-participating
households. Other social protection and reforms
can have an impact on gender equality, such as
the introduction of maternity/paternity benefits, the development of
long term care systems, the uniformization of retirement age, etc.

8

An estimated US$1.08 -US$2.52 for each cash transfer
dollar spills over into the local economy because
beneficiaries invest in their livelihoods. In Nicaragua,
Mexico and Zambia, beneficiaries of transfers, feeding
programmes or fee waivers are more likely to start up micro
enterprises. Cash transfers can also contribute to financial inclusion.
Cash transfers, when designed appropriately, can contribute to
financial inclusion. The New America Foundation which tracks 84 social
protection programmes in 43 countries-found that
64 per cent of cash transfers enabled savings by
providing access to a bank account, while 27 per cent
of cash transfers actively encouraged savings.4

10

The correlation between public
social protection expenditure and
inequality (Gini coefficient) is
strong (R2 = 0.3893)5.

Brazil’s Bolsa Familia Programme is estimated to be
responsible for 16 per cent of income inequality reduction in the
country between 1999 and 2009.

13

The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) list of “permissible”
works include conservation of water, groundwater
recharge, reduced soil
erosion, increased soil fertility, conservation
of biodiversity, reclamation of degraded crop
and grazing lands, enhanced leaf manure,
fuel wood and non-wood forest products supply among others.

15

Brazil’s Bolsa Verde programme provided additional
income to 73,000 Brazilian
families in end of 2014 in
exchange for maintenance and
sustainable use of natural resources improving
both forest health and economic conditions.

16

The Hunger Safety Net Programme (HSNP) cash
transfer scheme in northern Kenya was successful in
introducing rights education and enhancing the ability
of community groups to claim priority public services.

The MGNREGS public works programme in India
established a rights-based framework to enable
citizens to claim their rights to employment and
social protection.

Sources: World Bank 2015b; Barrientos and Niño-Zarazúa 2011; Slater, Holmes and Mathers 2014; GIZ 2013.

4
5
6

ILO 2016b.
Ravi and Tosh 2012.
ILO 2015b.

The challenge, and what this primer hopes to address, is articulating how social protection can play a transformative role in supporting the achievement of well-being for all, going beyond individual characteristics and averages
to address the structural constraints that hinder progress towards sustainable development. This includes social
protection that recognizes that the causes of deprivation do not lie solely within the individual, but rather are part
of established social norms. The need is for social protection that looks beyond providing for specific lacks, and
considers how to remove barriers for women, men, girls, and boys, to overcome the constraints that limit their wellbeing in a systemic way. The primer also aims to articulate how to achieve greater coherence among economic,
environmental and social objectives by means of social protection systems.7
The primer’s key objective is to provide UNDP Country Offices, programme staff and relevant partners
with a practical resource on ways to strengthen social protection to address the systemic and interlinked
objectives of the sustainable development agenda. It articulates and highlights some lessons learned
from the countries that are leading the way in thinking about social protection in the context of sustainable
development. Also, it aims to provide general, and useful, guidance on how to embed social protection as an
effective and efficient tool for sustainable development into governments’ priorities and programmes.
The primer emphasizes six guiding principles for social protection: ensure protection and promotion of human
rights; promote non-discrimination; foster gender equality and women’s empowerment; be risk-informed and
sensitive to environmental concerns; provide a continuum of protection; and promote universality. It also provides
a common understanding of how to position social protection in the context of sustainable development.
Readers will find information on the definitions and conceptualization of social protection; why UNDP is a key
actor in providing technical assistance for social protection; UNDP’s offerings in this area; and more in-depth
analysis of what it takes to move towards social protection that is systemic, inclusive and linked to efforts to
improve environmental sustainability. It includes good practices for different types of interventions, country
contexts, themes and target groups, as well as the current thinking of specialists and practitioners on the role
of social protection in the broader sustainable development agenda.
This primer is not a guidance note on how to design and implement specific social protection programmes
(e.g. cash transfers or cash-for-work), or administrative systems (e.g. a single beneficiary registry). Fortunately,
numerous such guides of excellent quality, developed both by UNDP and others, already exist and are listed
in the references section (Annex 3).8

1.2

Who is this Primer for? Where would it be useful?

This primer is for managers and programme staff at UNDP Country Offices working in areas related to social
protection, employment and livelihoods, gender or other areas where social protection can provide a useful
framework to organize government actions around national development objectives comprehending the SDGs. It is
also intended for policy advisers at UNDP regional centres and headquarters as well as all relevant partners involved
in the design, implementation and expansion of social protection programmes at the country level. These include
national and local government partners, civil society organizations, UN agencies, donors and the private sector.
This primer will be most useful for providing advice and technical assistance in countries looking to use social
protection as a policy for sustainable development. The alignment of country development plans with the
SDGs will provide an effective mechanism for anchoring social protection in the development agenda and for
the advancement of social protection systems.
This primer will help readers understand social protection. Why is it necessary and critical in the process of
SDG implementation? What are some of the challenges of implementing and scaling up social protection?
What is UNDP’s comparative advantage in this area and what can it do in your country? How can you design
and implement systemic, inclusive and environmentally sensitive social protection? It also provides guidance
on funding and raising resources for social protection.

7
8

Devereux and McGregor 2014.
For a set of practical tools that help countries improve their social protection system by analyzing its strengths and weaknesses and
offering options for further action, please visit www.ispatools.org.

11

CONCEPTUAL
FRAMEWORK:
Approach and Guiding
Principles of Social Protection
for Leaving No One Behind

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

12

This primer defines social protection
as a set of nationally owned policies
and instruments that provide income
support and facilitate access to goods
and services by all households and
individuals at least at minimally
accepted levels, to protect them from
deprivation and social exclusion,
particularly during periods of
insufficient income, incapacity or
inability to work

2

2.1

What is social protection?

Traditionally a concern of industrialized economies, in the past few decades, and in particular as a result of
the financial crises of 2008, social protection has emerged as a critical tool to improve the lives of people,
including the poorest and most marginalized across the world, and as a means to mitigate the effects of crises
and shocks. Today, every country in the world has at least some form of social protection.
The concept of social protection is blurred around the edges, and there is a great deal of variation in its vision,
objectives, approach, composition, and implementation. Different schools of thought exist and their views on
social protection are the subject of long debates and a rich body of literature.
Various agencies and organizations use differing organizing concepts to define social protection. Some definitions
of social protection focus on its building blocks, and define it as the aggregate of contributory, non-contributory,
and labour market programmes, or alternatively social assistance and social insurance.9 Others define it in terms
of its purpose or developmental goals, such as poverty reduction or the protection of vulnerable individuals. Still
others focus on the ways it moves individuals closer to developmental goals, commonly referred to as protection,
promotion, prevention and transformation.10 Approaches vary in terms of rationale (poverty reduction versus risk
prevention), scope (universal versus target groups), or preferred social protection measures. The common factor
in all these definitions is that social protection provides a policy framework to address (prevent and reduce)
poverty and vulnerability.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

14

Table 2.1 Some Definitions of Social Protection from Agencies and International
Organizations

9
10

Agency

Definition

Source

ILO

ILO refers to social protection as a right (Article
22 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights).
“Social protection” is always seen as a system, all
measures providing benefits, whether in cash
or in kind, contributory or non-contributory, to
secure protection across the lifecycle from lack of
income caused by sickness, disability, maternity,
employment injury, unemployment, old age,
or death of a family member. Social protection
systems include child and family allowances,
maternity benefits, support for those without
jobs, employment injury insurance, disability
benefits and old-age pensions.

World Social Protection
Report 2014/2015.

World Bank

Systems, policies, and programmes that “help
individuals and societies manage risk and
volatility and protect them from poverty and
destitution—through instruments that improve
resilience, equity, and opportunity.”

The World Bank 2012-2022
Social Protection and Labour
Strategy: Resilience, Equity
and Opportunity.

Ferreira and Robalino 2010.
Sabates-Wheeler and Devereux 2007.

Agency

Definition

Source

UNICEF

“The set of public and private policies and
programmes aimed at preventing, reducing and
eliminating economic and social vulnerabilities
to poverty and deprivation.”

UNICEF Social Protection
Strategic Framework.
Integrated Social Protection
Systems: Enhancing Equity for
Children

IDS

“Social protection describes all public and
private initiatives that provide income or
consumption transfers to the poor, protect the
vulnerable against livelihood risks, and enhance
the social status and rights of the marginalised;
with the overall objective of reducing the
economic and social vulnerability of poor,
vulnerable and marginalised groups.”

Devereux, Stephen and
Rachel Sabates-Wheeler,
2004. Transformative Social
Protection. IDS Working Paper
232.

Asian
Development
Bank

“Set of policies and programs designed to reduce
poverty and vulnerability by promoting efficient
labour markets, diminishing people’s exposure
to risks, and enhancing their capacity to protect
themselves against hazards and interruption/loss
of income.”

Social Protection Strategy

African Union

Social Protection “encompasses a range of public
actions carried out by the state and others that
address risk, vulnerability, discrimination and
chronic poverty.”

First Session of the AU
Conference of Ministers in
Charge of Social Development
Windhoek, Namibia 27 - 31
October 2008

European
Report on
Development

“Social protection is the specific set of public
actions to address the vulnerability of people’s
lives via social insurance, offering protection
against risk and adversity throughout life; via
social assistance, offering payments to support
and enable the poor; and via social inclusion
efforts that enhance the capability of the
marginalised to access social insurance and
assistance.”

European Report on
Development 2010

UNAIDS

“The objective of ‘social protection’ is broadly
to reduce the economic and social vulnerability
of all people, and to enhance the social status
and rights of poor and marginalized people by
providing social transfers, and ensuring access to
basic essential services and equitable regulation,
which can take many forms.”

UNAIDS/UNICEF/IDS: “HIVSensitive Social Protection:
What does the evidence say?”

This primer defines social protection as a set of nationally owned policies and instruments that provide
income support and facilitate access to goods and services by all households and individuals at least at
minimally accepted levels, to protect them from deprivation and social exclusion, particularly during periods

15

of insufficient income, incapacity or inability to work.11 On a more operational level, social protection systems
provide contributory or non-contributory forms of income support that reduce and prevent poverty; ensures
access to basic social services to all, especially for groups that are traditionally vulnerable or excluded;
stimulates productive inclusion through the development of capabilities, skills, rights and opportunities for
the poor and excluded; builds resilience and protects people against the risks of livelihood shocks throughout
their lifecycle; and helps remove structural barriers, including barriers within the household, that prevent
people from achieving well-being. Social protection systems can include various schemes and programmes,
including universal schemes, social assistance, social insurance, employment guarantees and other public
employment programmes, and measures to facilitate access to education, health and care services.
This concept of social protection is not new. Many countries are leading the way in their vision of social
protection as an investment to overcome deprivation, in making social protection inclusive, and in the
integration of economic, social and environmental concerns in their social development agenda.

2.2

Why do we need social protection to achieve sustainable
development?

Growth alone cannot guarantee the eradication of extreme poverty or the significant reduction of inequality. In
the past 25 years economic growth has been an important driver in the reduction of poverty around the world,
and it will continue to play a critical role in future poverty reduction efforts. But eradicating poverty by 2030 will
require growth that is sustainable and inclusive, complemented by redistributive interventions that guarantee at
least a minimum level of well-being for those who are unable to participate in and benefit from growth.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

16

This section briefly reviews the international evidence on whether, how and in what circumstances social
protection programmes enhance sustainable development outcomes such as poverty eradication, the
reduction of inequality, including gender inequality, and the achievement of inclusive and sustainable growth.

Poverty reduction
Empirical evidence indicates that social protection is an effective tool to fight poverty. In the last decade or so, there
has been a significant and widely studied proliferation of large-scale cash transfer programmes, including cash-forwork, in developing countries with over 700 million people around the world enrolled in cash transfer programmes.12
One of the best-known and successful conditional cash transfers (CCT) is the Brazilian Bolsa Familia (family grant).
The programme currently covers more than 13 million households and transfers around US$17 per month per child
to mothers as long as children attend school and health services. A 2009 study based on the National Household
Survey, found that the Bolsa Familia programme explained 18 per cent of the reduction in the poverty gap and a
quarter of the reduction in the squared poverty gap—from 5.9 per cent to 4.6 per cent—in the country.13 Additionally,
administrative records suggest that, in 2009, 4.3 million out of 12.4 million beneficiary families moved out of extreme
poverty because they received the financial benefits.14 Similarly, Mexico’s Oportunidades programme has reduced the
numbers living in poverty by 10 per cent and the poverty gap by 30 per cent.15
Universal cash transfers potentially have even greater impact. In Tanzania, for example, simulations conducted
by the ILO show that basic universal old age pension benefits and child benefits to school children under the age
of 14 have the potential to reduce the overall poverty rate by around one-third.16

11
12
13
14
15
16

Based on ILO and UNDP 2011.
World Bank 2015b.
Soares and Satyro 2009.
Brazil, Ministry of Social Development 2012.
Skoufias and Parker 2001.
Cichon, Hagemejer and Woodall 2006.

Social protection also prevents people from falling into poverty. For example, the World Health Organization
estimates that every year around 100 million people are pushed under the poverty line just because they have
to use, and pay for, health services. Social health insurance mechanisms reduce reliance on out-of-pocket
payments. Many countries are achieving universal health coverage though robust public investments in health.

Figure 2.1 Poverty Reduction and Bolsa Familia Expenditure in Brazil
30

Poverty headcount ratio at $3.10 a day
(2011 PPP) (% of population)

25.18

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.90 a day
(2011 PPP) (% of population)

25

20
17.4
15

12.71
11.1

10
8.7
5

5.5

6.6

6.8

7.8

11.1
9

10.6 11.1

12.512.4

14.4
12.9

13.4

17

3.2 3.6
0

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Billions of Reais (1 Reais = USD 0.50)

2008

2009

2010

2011

Number of families

Source: Brazil Ministry of Social Development and World Development Indicators.

Improvement in nutrition, health and schooling
In terms of nutrition, health and schooling, studies of various social protection interventions such as child
benefits, temporary employment schemes, unemployment insurance, pensions, and cash transfers, provide
evidence that they can have positive impacts on school attendance,17 health, food security and nutrition,18 19
and productivity. Barrientos and Niño-Zarazúa (2011) provide a comprehensive review of the available empirical
evidence on the impacts of transfer programmes, summarized in the table below.

17
18
19

Fernandez and Lopez-Calva 2010.
Devereux 2001; Barrientos and Niño-Zarazúa 2011.
Devereux 2012.

table 2.2 empirical evidence of social protection impact in nutrition, health and
schooling
Programme

Nutrition

Child Support
Grant (South
Africa)

3.5 cm increase in
height as adults.
Increased future
earnings 60-130 per
cent greater than the
cost of the grant.

Old Age Pension
(South Africa)

Significant impact on
nutritional status of
children in beneficiary
households.

Mexico’s
ProgresaOportunidades

One centimetre gain
in height for age, two
years after the start of
the programme

Bono de
Desarrollo
Humano in
Ecuador

Increased food
expenditure by 25 per
cent.

Familias
en Accion
(Colombia)

Reported increase in
intake of protein-rich
foods and vegetables.

Doubled per capita
health care visits in
rural communities;

Higher school enrolment,
less grade repetition and
better grade progression,
lower dropout rates, and
higher school re-entry
rates among dropouts,
particularly in rural areas.
Increased school enrolment
for children aged six to 17
by about 10 percentage
points.

Increased percentage
of children attending
health check-ups;
Decline in proportion
of children affected by
diarrhoea.

Ethiopia’s
Productive
Safety Net
Programme

Schooling

Pensions regularly used to
pay grandchildren’s school
fees.

12 per cent lower
incidence of illness
amongst children.

18

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

Health

10 per cent improvement
in schooling for children
aged 12 to 17 living in rural
areas, and a 5.2 per cent
improvement for those in
urban areas.

Decreased seasonal
malnutrition and
income variability
among poor
households.

Chile Solidario

Source: Barrientos Niño-Zarzúa 2011.

Preventative health
care amongst children
living in rural areas
improved by four to
six percentage points.

Participants report that their
school enrolment in primary
education improved by
seven to nine per cent,
relative to non-participants
in the programme.

By tackling poverty and improving human capacities, social protection is an effective instrument for
narrowing development gaps and reducing inequality in all its forms. For example, a universal child
allowance (Asignación universal por hijo) introduced in Argentina in 2009 is estimated to have reduced
inequality by approximately 5 per cent.20 The previously discussed Brazilian Bolsa Familia Programme is
estimate to be responsible for 16 per cent of income inequality reduction in the country between 1999 and
2009.21
Furthermore, social protection programmes with gender-sensitive design features can be efficient mechanisms
for empowering women, and cash transfers that focus on historically underprivileged groups can help mitigate
horizontal inequalities.

Resilience building
Shocks and risks have important implications for people’s well-being.22 Not only do they lead to immediate
losses in income and increases in poverty rates, but they also have longer-term effects that can be irreversible.
As households struggle, they engage in coping behaviours such as selling of productive assets, skipping
meals or eating less nutritious food, postponing medical care, and taking children out of school. By preventing
people from falling below a critical threshold of well-being, and reducing households’ perception of risk,
social protection can prevent transitory shocks from having permanent consequences. Protecting human
and productive capital allows households to recover to pre-crisis levels once the temporary shock has passed.
In countries with social protection schemes in place, social protection can stabilize the economy and facilitate
early recovery in times of economic shock.23 24
Social protection instruments also have the potential to strengthen resilience against natural disasters,
promote measures to protect ecosystems from further degradation, and facilitate quick recovery from
extreme weather events. Weather-indexed crop insurance, public works programmes, asset and cash transfers
have helped build resilience to climate shocks.

Growth
Evidence also suggests that social protection contributes significantly to economic growth by improving
access to health care, education and income, which improves productivity, labour market participation
and entrepreneurial activity,25 and also acts as a stabilizer in times of economic upheaval. During economic
downturns, social protection can prevent aggregate demand from dropping sharply, maintain purchasing
power at a minimum level and stop unemployment from eroding human or productive capital accumulation.26
There is also some evidence that social protection contributes to business performance, particularly by SMEs.
A recent study examining the relationship between social security provision and firm level performance
among Vietnamese SMEs, finds that those SMEs which increase the social security covered workforce by 10
per cent, experience a revenue gain per worker of between 1.1 and 2.6 per cent and a profit gain of between
1.3 and 3.0 per cent.27

20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

ILO 2015b.
Soares, Ribas and Rafael 2010.
Cutler et al 2002; Paxson and Schady 2005; Baird, Friedman and Schady 2007.
Davies and others 2009.
De Janvry, et al. 2010; Siegel and de la Fuente, 2010 López-Calva and Ortiz-Juárez 2009; Fernandez et al., 2011.
Samson 2009.
ILO 2014.
Lee and Torm 2013.

19

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

20

Social cohesion
Social protection can, in theory, contribute to building social cohesion and strengthening the legitimacy and
effectiveness of states in a number of ways. There can be no inclusive and cohesive society where the poor
and rich drift further and further apart. While the sources of political conflict vary from one country to another,
conflict generally originates in severe social grievances, often rooted in the perception of inequality among
social, ethnic, religious or other groups. Social protection measures have a central role to play in easing and
preventing such sources of conflict. The OECD (2009) and the Chronic Poverty Research Programme (CPRC)
both emphasize that social protection can contribute to social cohesion in a manner that strengthens the
“contract” between citizens and the state, and promotes social inclusion, integration and greater accountability.
A recent UNESCAP report concludes that individuals living in countries with well-established and generous
social protection systems have greater trust in their governments.28 The UN Independent Expert on Extreme
Poverty recognizes that cash transfers can assist states in fulfilling their human rights obligations. Transfers
have the potential to enhance a number of economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights. Unfortunately,
less evidence is available on social protection’s impact on social inclusion. Some studies do point to an
improvement in recipients’ social status as a result of social protection.29 But more evidence needs to be
generated in this area.
A recent study of the Familias en Acción programme in Colombia found qualitative and quantitative evidence of
a positive impact on social capital. It found that the programme requirements that women recipients engage
in social activities, such as attending meetings and visiting health centres, have improved cooperation and
trust in beneficiary communities.30

28
29
30

UNESCAP 2015.
Arnold and Greenslade 2011.
Attanasio, Pellerano and Reyes 2009.

Environmental sustainability
The impact of social protection on the environment is twofold; in the short run, as previously discussed, social
protection builds resilience to climate change by increasing the adaptive capacity of those that rely on a changing
environment for their livelihoods. In the longer term, social protection can promote environmental sustainability
by, for example, improving natural resource management. Social protection is linked to climate change in several
ways. National social protection systems can be used to respond to climate-related shocks. In many cases, this
is done through the addition of climate vulnerabilities to regular social protection needs assessments, and then
adapting and entering intended beneficiary data into social registries. Additionally, relevant triggers can be used
to disburse payments or payment top-ups automatically, or to relax eligibility criteria, making it easier for more
beneficiaries to participate, after adverse weather-related events. Social protection can also be used as a set of
measures to facilitate the social acceptance of climate reforms aiming at reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

2.3

Guiding principles of social protection for sustainable
development

Social protection for sustainable development supports the objectives of social inclusion, economic
development and environmental sustainability. The specific form this takes will vary from country to country,
in objective, goal, design, implementation and results. Each country will find a model that suits its priorities
and context. This primer sets out a set of guiding principles with the objective of enhancing social protection
systems that are consistent with, and have maximum impact on, the achievement of sustainable development.

21

Promote
universality
Provide a
continuum of
protection
(life-cycle
approach)

Protect
and promote
human
rights

Guiding
Principles
of Social
Protection

Remain
risk-informed
and sensitive to
environmental
concerns

Ensure
nondiscrimination

Foster gender
equality and
women’s
empowerment

Protect and promote human rights
If inclusive and systemic, social protection provides a mechanism for individuals to realize their human
rights to social security and adequate social services. By ensuring that all individuals have access to essential
services (health care, education, water, sanitation, etc.) and at least a minimum level of income and food
security, countries can promote social inclusion and the full participation of all people in society and

economic opportunities. The notion of social protection as an obligation under human rights law is very
well established and flows directly from the right to social security and a decent standard of living, which is
articulated in Articles 22 and 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Articles 9 and 11 of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.31 The human rights framework provides an
operational guideline for transforming the dynamics between the state and the individual, shifting the role of
beneficiaries from passive receivers to active participants in the system.

Ensure non-discrimination
Social protection systems, in design and implementation, must be free of discrimination. While most legislation
regarding social protection uses inclusive language, marginalized groups are likely to miss opportunities to
benefit for various reasons including stigmatization, discrimination, and lack of access and lack of accessible
information about their rights. Social protection systems and processes need to recognize that that the more
excluded people are, the harder it is to reach them and hear their voices. Non-discrimination needs to be an
active target of social protection systems, seeking to hear the voice of right holders, both at community and
individual levels, understand their specific needs and barriers, and address them. This requires the involvement
and participation of the community, and specific groups within the community, such as social partners (workers
and employers organizations) in the process of social protection design and implementation. The dominant
relationship in existing social protection is between the state and the individual, and non-discrimination
requires the involvement of community groups to identify the needs of those left behind.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

22

Foster gender equality and women’s empowerment
The promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of women is a core principle of sustainable development.
Social protection must be gender-responsive in its design and implementation. It must seek to encompass the
different needs and constraints faced by women, men, girls and boys, and reduce gender inequalities in access to
and control over resources and the benefits of development. Women and men face different risks and vulnerabilities,
some specific to their gender and others exacerbated by gender inequalities and discrimination. The design and
implementation of social protection programmes should address such gender-related constraints, including the
unequal distribution of unpaid care and domestic work and other barriers to women’s economic advancement. For
example, maternity and child care benefits can contribute to women’s empowerment and active participation in the
labour market while improving maternal health and children’s health and nutritional status and school attendance.

Remain risk-informed and sensitive to environmental concerns
Social protection must address social and environmental opportunities and risks in an integrated manner,
recognizing the fundamental linkages with environmental sustainability. First, the implementation of social
protection needs to do no harm. Social protection proposals must be reviewed for potential environmental
risks, and ensure that potential adverse impacts are assessed and avoided, or minimized, mitigated, and
managed. 32 Second, social protection should seek opportunities to improve environmental sustainability. The
poor rely on increasingly unreliable natural resources for their housing and livelihoods. They also tend to have
knowledge about how to preserve the natural resources they rely on, and thus are key to finding solutions to
environmental challenges. Finally, social protection must be risk–informed and aim to improve the resilience
of individuals to the threats of a changing environment. Improved human capital, asset accumulation, and
management of land can make individuals less exposed to shocks, and provide more coping mechanisms if
shocks do hit.

31
32

The right to social security is also enshrined in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, Article 11;
Convention on the Rights of the Child, Article 26; the Convention for the Protection of Migrant Workers and their Families, Article 27;
and the Commission on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Article 28. CEDAW, Art 11(e) and 12.
Based on UNDP Social and Environmental Standards.

Provide a continuum of protection (life-cycle approach)
Social protection should be based on a continuum of protection, available at different stages in individuals’
lives, including transitions from one stage to the next and from one employment status to another (for instance
when workers move from the informal sector to the formal sector or vice versa). This means it will encompass
the particular risks faced, and the specific rights to be protected at each stage in life. Importantly, social
protection systems must recognize the need to prevent and address the build-up of risks and vulnerabilities
throughout the life cycle; for example, infant malnutrition that has lasting impacts on the human capital and
productive capacities of individuals throughout their lives. Therefore, social protection systems must cover all
stages to prevent circumstances in one phase, or temporary shocks, from becoming permanent or affecting
the next stage in life. Special attention must be paid to sequencing and timing interventions to develop
capabilities at the appropriate time, as well as to prevent the intergenerational transmission of deprivations.
Special effort must made to design and implement interventions that are mutually reinforcing, for example,
childcare provision that helps women go back to work, and pensions that improve schooling outcomes.

Promote universality
Universality of social protection recognizes the right to social protection, and it needs to be fulfilled by a
comprehensive and coherent system of programmes based on national solidarity. Countries achieve
universality generally by a mix of contributory and non-contributory programmes. The principle of universality
aims to address the specific needs of marginalized groups to ensure that social protection is truly universal
and sustainable, and to maximize delivery and impacts across a large number of SDGs.
Differences in needs, gender, ethnicity, cultural norms, and place of residence, among others, require
differentiated services and delivery mechanisms. Resources must be allocated accordingly to ensure
appropriate levels of support and access to all. This approach to social protection focuses on creating
linkages and coordination among social protection programmes, and across sectors, while addressing
power imbalances that drive and entrench poverty, vulnerabilities and inequality. It requires the reduction
of fragmentation across programmes, actors, and levels of government, to decrease inefficiencies, enhance
coverage, and improve responsiveness to risks.

23

UNDP’S WORK
ON SOCIAL
PROTECTION FOR
SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

24

UNDP’s extensive portfolio of social
protection includes activities to support
governments in the development of
national strategies, policies and laws
concerning social protection, to build
local and national capacities in the
design, implementation and delivery of
social protection and to improve genderresponsiveness of social protection,
among others.

3

3.1

The added value of UNDP in social protection

With a portfolio of over US$170 million worth of projects on social protection in 2015 in more than 50 countries,
UNDP views social protection as a key tool to transform its vision to “help countries achieve the simultaneous
eradication of poverty and significant reduction of inequalities and exclusion,”33 as stated in its Strategic Plan
2014-2017, into reality.
UNDP is very well-positioned to be an important partner working with national and local governments on
efforts to articulate and implement social protection for sustainable development. The cross-sectoral scope of
UNDP’s work touches on all aspects and systems of social protection. It has been a key player in advancing
policy dialogue concerning social protection, generating relevant evidence and convening relevant partners.
It has also been a key player in extending social protection programmes, reforming them, fostering innovation,
transferring knowhow across countries, and working closely with traditionally excluded communities to ensure
that their voices are represented and their needs addressed. Finally, as the UN’s lead agency for sustainable
development, UNDP is well-placed to support countries in integrating environmental sustainability policies into
social protection.
UNDP possess a number of key advantages:
■■

UNDP has a mandate to support countries in their development paths, and coordinate the UN system at the
country level. It has five decades of experience in supporting development processes. Its strength relies on
its on-the-ground presence in some 170 countries, close partnerships with government, and role as
a bridge between government, civil society and other relevant actors. In particular, UNDP has a history
of effectively promoting dialogue between government and civil society at national and local levels, and
engaging a wide range of stakeholders to enable a broadening of support for improvements in social policies.

■■

As coordinator of the UN systems, UNDP can lead on “One-UN” work on social protection floors. In a call in
2014, the UNDG Chair, Helen Clark, and the ILO Director, Guy Ryder, requested all UN Resident Coordinators
and UN Country Teams to consider a number of steps towards implementing social protection floors (see
Annex 1). These steps include building One-UN social protection floors teams. UNDP has advanced these
efforts, helping constitute social protection teams and task force at the regional and country level.

■■

UNDP has a cross-sectoral approach to development, with a mission to empower people to address
deprivations in all the areas that matter for well-being, while helping nations grow in a manner that is
inclusive and sustainable. UNDP’s policy and programming work covers inextricably linked areas such as
inclusive and sustainable growth, democratic governance, crisis prevention and recovery, environmental
sustainability, and poverty and inequality reduction. In its social protection portfolio, UNDP draws on its
extensive technical expertise. This cross-sectoral approach enables synergy and the delivery of multiple
benefits, adding value to UNDP’s work on social protection. It also positions UNDP to lead in supporting
social protection that has a maximum impact on the interrelated Sustainable Development Goals. UNDP
is fit to connect the dots, and look at interventions in the different policy areas that impact the lives of
people in a coherent and cohesive manner to discover win-win solutions and minimize trade-offs.

■■

With the knowledge accumulated as the scorekeeper of the MDGs and through its work to accelerate MDG
achievements, UNDP has the necessary experience to help countries position the SDGs as the organizing
principle of development efforts. UNDP is already playing a key role in supporting comprehensive policy
approaches that mainstream the 2030 Agenda at the national and local levels, including policies relevant

33

UNDP 2014a.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

26

to social protection. It is also positioned to assist with the identification of accelerators that can maximize
progress across various goals and targets of the SDGs, help countries to navigate the trade-offs implicit in
the ambitious sustainable development agenda and devise adequate policy responses.
■■

UNDP has extensive experience advocating and working towards universal social protection policies.
Universality recognizes the right to social protection, and needs to be fulfilled by a system of programmes that
ensure universal coverage. Normally this is achieved by a mix of contributory and non-contributory schemes.

■■

UNDP has a long history and ample experience of supporting inclusive social protection that goes beyond
income redistribution to include reforms that tackle social exclusion. These include legal and policy reforms
to change disempowering and discriminatory social norms and practices and to create social environments
that enable and encourage the most marginalized to register, access, and benefit from social protection.
UNDP works with right bearers, particularly traditionally excluded groups, to empower and engage them
and generate relevant evidence about both enabling factors and obstacles related to their specific needs.

■■

UNDP’s experience includes assistance towards the implementation of social protection floors34
to guarantee minimum access to services and income security for all women, men, girls and boys. This is
generally focussed on setting One-UN social protection country teams. UNDP, together with its partners, has
worked with a wide number of countries to assist in the process of building their nationally defined social
protection floors or to introduce elements thereof. The results of programmes in these countries show
that the impact of the social protection floor on poverty, vulnerability and inequality can be dramatic.35
In particular, UNDP has worked to overcome gender gaps in the services guaranteed by social protection
floors that result from intra-household dynamics where women are often less protected (their access to social
security within the labour market is limited), more vulnerable (because they bear the majority of unpaid care
and domestic work) and disproportionately socially excluded (they have less access to productive resources
and to economic and political power). Identifying the gender gaps that the social protection floor proposes
to correct means doing away with the systematic assignment of unpaid care and domestic work to women. It
means calculating and taking full account of the economic and social benefits cost of unpaid care and domestic
work, and establishing social protection mechanisms predicated on reducing the inequitable assignment of
unpaid care and domestic work to women and girls.36

■■

UNDP has a vast portfolio of work on people-centred environment and natural policies. The 2030
Agenda and the SDGs link the concerns of people and planet)— recognizing the interdependence of
human well-being and healthy ecosystems. UNDP’s experience supporting effective environmental
management through a focus on: biodiversity and ecosystem services; sustainable land management
and desertification; water and ocean governance; extractive industries: and green economy, uniquely
positions the agency to make the connections to bridge social protection and environmental sustainability
efforts. UNDP’s integrated programming at the country level is already successfully linking environmental
sustainability with issues of poverty, gender, governance and crisis prevention. In India, for example, UNDP
conducted an assessment of the environmental implications of rural development schemes, and provided
recommendations for “greening” them.37 This cross-sectoral approach supports synergies and the delivery of
multiple benefits across the SDGs, and promotes resilience, sustainability and inclusive growth.

34

The social protection floor (SPF) approach promotes access to essential social transfers and services in the areas of health, water and
sanitation, education, food, housing, and life- and asset-saving information. It is an approach that emphasizes the need to implement
comprehensive, coherent and coordinated social protection policies to guarantee services and social transfers throughout the life
cycle, paying particular attention to vulnerable groups.
UNDP and ILO 2011.
ILO, UNEGEEW and UNDP 2012.
UNDP India 2012.

35
36
37

27

3.2

What can UNDP do to support social protection in my country?

A systematic review of UNDP projects linked to social protection in 2015 found that UNDP’s current portfolio
of social protection activities can be organized around the following categories:

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

28

■■

Support for governments in the development of national strategies, policies and laws concerning
social protection. In 2015, UNDP supported the Government of Mauritius in the development of an
integrated national plan against poverty and social exclusion, covering a wide variety of sectors,
including social protection, environmental sustainability, inequality reduction, employment generation
and improved social housing. In The Gambia in 2014, UNDP supported the formulation of the National
Social Protection Policy and Implementation Plan 2015-2020, which presents a comprehensive and crosscutting social protection framework, defining a set of priority actions to guide the gradual establishment
of an integrated and inclusive social protection system in the country. Similarly, in Tanzania, UNDP
contributed to the revision of the National Social Protection Policy and the development of the Action
Plan. In Uzbekistan, UNDP’s input papers on social protection, environmental sustainability, and
governance have put the issues of sustainable environment and socio-economic development at the
core of the Vision 2030 discussions.

■■

Provide the framework and approach for building social protection systems, including social
protection floors, at the country level, including coordination within governments and with development
partners. For example, UNDP Belize, in partnership with UNDP’s International Policy Centre for Inclusive
Growth (IPC-IG), supported the Government to ensure the coordinated development of a Social Protection
System systematically to address the increasingly pressing needs of the poor and vulnerable. In Mauritius,
UNDP engaged in intense advocacy and provided technical assistance for setting up the Social Register of

Mauritius (SRM) Unit within the Ministry of Social Security, and also provided statistical advisory services
to formulate the proxy-means test and analyse data. More than 40,000 households, the equivalent of
140,000 individuals (11 per cent of the population) registered for the SRM schemes in 2014.
■■

Support efforts to build local and national capacities in the design, implementation and delivery
of social protection. This includes enhancing policymakers’ awareness of evolving social challenges,
policy options, strategies and good practices in social protection. In Viet Nam, as part of its support to
the Government’s Master Plan for Social Assistance Reform, UNDP co-sponsored the Viet Nam Social
Protection Summer School, a week-long course for government officials on designing and implementing
social protection programmes in the context of Viet Nam. In India, UNDP provides on-site technical
assistance to the National AIDS Control Organization (NACO), which has been able to reach out and
provide social protection entitlements to approximately 700,000 people living with and affected by HIV.
The UNDP Model on HIV social protection was scaled up and made operational in 100 priority districts in
early 2014. In Egypt, UNDP and the International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth organized capacitybuilding workshops to enhance the capacities of governmental and non-governmental officials to
monitor and evaluate social protection programmes.

■■

Lead and participate in the generation of evidence-based analysis for social protection systems, including
gap analysis, diagnostics, evaluation of existing programmes, impact evaluation on specific groups, and
analysis of specific barriers to access. In Croatia, for example, UNDP is working with the Ministry of Social
Policy to collect data on all social assistance and analyses of social assistance benefits to create the Strategy
for a Cost-Effective Social Protection System. This strategy aims to avoid overlaps in benefits at national and
local levels, and improve efficacy. In Egypt, in collaboration with the Ministries of Planning (MOP) and Social
Solidarity (MOSS) and the World Bank, UNDP produced a desk review on Conditional Cash Transfers which
was used as concrete input in the policy formulation of the national Government’s programme for cash
transfers launched in 2014: Karama and Takaful. Karama is a cash transfer for the elderly and disabled living
in poverty. Takaful is a conditional cash transfer based on school enrolment and scheduled health visits,
targeting poor families with children. All payments are done electronically. The Government plans to reach
500,000 beneficiaries in six Governorates in 2015 and two million by 2017.

■■

Support national partners’ efforts to increase the gender-responsiveness of social protection measures
so that women as well as men can participate in the economy and manage their households. These
measures include social insurance to protect against unemployment, ill health and disability, as well
as subsidized agricultural inputs and employment guarantee schemes. In Central America and the
Dominican Republic, UNDP partnered with the ILO and UN Women to contribute to the policy debate
on the implementation of social protection floors with a gender dimension. With the elaboration of the
sub-regional report “Fighting inequality from the basics: The social protection floor and gender equality,”
UNDP advocated the implementation of national social protection floors as key elements of addressing
gender inequalities. The report emphasized that correcting gender gaps means doing away with the
systematic assignment of unpaid care and domestic work to women. It also means calculating and
taking full account of the economic and social costs of unpaid care and domestic work. As a result of this
work and at the request of the Government of the Dominican Republic, UNDP, the ILO and UN Women
have analysed the inclusion of the gender dimension in the existing social protection system, proposed
solutions and developed a cost analysis for its implementation.

■■

Enable communities to organize and articulate their needs and generate evidence of the gaps in
services. Breaking the cycle of inequality and poverty requires institutions that are responsive to the needs
of people and promote their active participation in decision making processes. Enabling communities
to articulate their needs has been a particularly powerful tool for more inclusive and sustainable social
protection. In Cambodia, for example, UNDP and UNAIDS, in partnership with the Cambodian People
Living with HIV network (CPN+), organized the national consultation on Advancing HIV-Sensitive Social

29

Protection with more than 70 representatives from the Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC), civil society,
community groups and development partners. The consultation identified key areas for improving access
to social protection services and developing services that meet the needs of households affected by HIV.
These included adapting eligibility criteria, making services more user-friendly and non-discriminatory,
increasing the community’s understanding of how to access and use available services, and ensuring that
communities are engaged in designing, planning, implementing and monitoring services. Since then,
many of these recommendations have been adopted in Cambodia’s National Development Strategy.
■■

Support groups affected by crises such as natural disasters, conflict or political instability, through cash
transfers, cash-for-work, and other livelihood- and income-generating programmes, with a special focus on
marginalized or vulnerable groups such as women, children, youth, ethnic minorities, indigenous people,
people living with disabilities, people living with HIV, etc. In Tajikistan, for example, UNDP supported the
mainstreaming of the mine action victim assistance programme in UNDP’s Disability Programme and the
activities of the Ministry of Health and Social Protection in favour of persons with disabilities (PwD). In
Yemen, to support displaced and host populations, UNDP established a cash-for-work scheme targeting
displaced people and the communities that host them. The programme provides two months of paid
work to both men and women.

■■

Facilitate international knowledge, expertise and experience sharing between countries that
have successfully established social protection and other countries interested in planning, expanding,
extending or reorienting their social protection programmes. These efforts include UNDP’s work on
south-south cooperation, communities of practice and international exchanges. For example, in 2015
UNDP in collaboration with the Brazilian Government and the African Union, hosted an International
Seminar on Social Protection in Africa, bringing together experts from 12 African countries and Brazil
to share experiences and promote the debate on social protection. The seminar resulted in a set of
recommendations for social protection in Africa that were then endorsed by some 70 ministers of African
countries at a high-level meeting in Addis Ababa. In Jamaica, UNDP facilitated a study tour to Chile and
Peru of four government staff members on Social Protection and Poverty Reduction in conjunction with
the International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth (IPC-IG) in Brazil. The study tour aimed, among other
things, to collect evidence for the participants to have input into elaborating a new long-term antipoverty strategy and social protection for the country.

■■

Development of knowledge products such as guidance notes, documented case studies of good
practices and lessons learned from countries’ experiences. In Tanzania, UNDP’s support, with other
development partners, of analysis of poverty and drivers of poverty dynamics as revealed in the 2007 and
2011/2013 Household Budget Surveys, has resulted in commitments by UN Agencies, the World Bank,
development partners and the Government to support scaling up of the social protection programme,
through a UN Joint Programme on Social Protection (consisting of UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA and ILO) to
accelerate poverty reduction and enhance the inclusiveness of growth in Tanzania. In 2013, UNDP
supported a study on the multidimensionality of poverty in the Seychelles. The results (published in 2014
in the first edition of Island Studies: Journal of the University of Seychelles and launched at the SIDS in
Samoa explored poverty and gender as well as various other dimensions. The study found a tendency for
poverty to be more pronounced in female-headed households, and a high level of shelter destitution.
This could lead to a rethinking of the social welfare programmes, and has provided important information
to the Government in its pursuit of policies and programmes to support the sector. Additionally, the
design of policies aimed at improving the low coverage and fragmentation of the social protection
systems has been the main goal of the UNDPs Commitment to Fiscal Equity Project in Latin America
through the development of a toolkit for diagnosis and micro simulations of social and fiscal reforms. In
coordination with national governments, UNDP has implemented the initiative in Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Mexico, and Peru, fostering a national debate on fiscal and social reforms, and on how
to finance social protection schemes. The toolkit has provided the governments of these countries with

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

30

31

detailed information on how much poverty and inequality reduction can be achieved through reforms
to social programmes, subsidies, taxes and universal protection schemes; which tax and social benefit
reallocations may affect the progressivity of social policies; and what the gains from a particular tax and
social reform are likely to be. In all the countries mentioned above, the development of the simulator
implied the transfer of capacities and knowledge from UNDP to national governments.
■■

Provide technical assistance on “greening” social protection programmes. In India, for example, UNDP
conducted an assessment of the environmental implications of rural development schemes in India, and
provided strategies for inclusive rural development embodying the principles of environmental sustainability.38
It did this through the analysis of six flagship Government of India schemes, including the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), the largest rural development programme in India,
and looked at improving quality of ecosystems, enabling sustainable livelihoods, strengthening the resilience
of local communities to enable them to recover from extreme weather events and reducing ecological
footprint through efficient use of energy, material and natural resources.

38

UNDP India 2012.

POLICY COHERENCE:
towards a system of social
protection

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

32

For social protection to be effective in
reducing inequalities and leaving no
one behind, it must be a coordinated
system of programmes that interact
and complement each other across
development objectives, and address
the underlying causes of deprivations.

4

4.1

Overview of programmes and policies

The building blocks of social protection systems are the programmes and policies they encompass, and the
processes through which they reach right holders and connect with each other and with other sectors. The
success of a social protection system relies on the extent to which the combination of programmes is effective
in achieving the objectives set out by the government in social protection strategies or development policies.
There are many different ways to categorize the different social protection instruments used to improve the
lives of women, men, girls and boys. In this primer we will look at (i) non-contributory social transfers; (ii) social
insurance (fully or partially contributory); (iii) social services; and (iv) labour market policies. This section will
provide an overview of these categories and the type of programmes that fall into them.
A social transfer is a benefit provided by the government or another actor to an individual (or household)
in need of a specific type of social assistance. Social transfers encompass a wide spectrum of programmes,
ranging from ad hoc instruments such as humanitarian relief, to regular, institutionalized and predictable
instruments such as child grants or food stamps.
The positive effects of social transfers include a direct increase in the income and/or purchasing power of the
individual or household, and, depending on the specific form of the transfer, enhanced nutrition, education,
health, living arrangements, access to safe water, sanitation, etc. However, when social transfers are provided
to households it cannot be assumed that they are equitably shared within them, and for this reason, genderresponsive social transfers must target individual women and men and should not lead to an increase in
unpaid care and domestic work.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

34

Contributory schemes are those where beneficiaries make regular contributions to a scheme that protect
them in the event of, for example, maternity, unemployment or illness.39 Sometimes costs are matched or
subsidized by the government. Insurance can be provided through public social insurance (see below),
insurance companies, or through mutual funds. Given that formal sector employment is usually maleintensive, many existing contributory schemes perpetuate or reinforce gender inequalities, yet many social
insurance schemes contain provisions that work towards closing gender gaps.
Social insurance refers to contributory schemes that include a risk-pooling mechanism based on the principle of
solidarity. Usually, social insurance schemes guarantee protection in the case of specific risks or contingencies, such
as unemployment, sickness, maternity, disability, employment injury or old age. In many cases, social insurance
schemes include non-contributory elements that allow for a more equitable distribution of benefits, particularly
for those with low incomes and limited contributory capacity. This can include redistribution within the schemes,
or partial financing from the government budget (general taxation); the latter type of schemes are also referred
to as partially contributory schemes. One caveat of contributory social insurance is that is strongly linked to the
formal labour market and excludes workers in informal employment, yet many countries have made great strides
to extend coverage to those workers.
Many countries have combined contributory and non-contributory schemes to extend pensions and health
coverage to men and women with low incomes not covered by contributory systems, because they are in
the informal sector or self-employed. A large number of countries have implemented non-contributory old
age pensions to achieve universal pension coverage, including Bolivia, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, Nepal
and South Africa. Other countries have put in place partially contributory schemes to ensure coverage for
previously uncovered workers, such as the rural pension in Brazil. Many countries have achieved, or are
working towards, universal health coverage through the combination of contribution- and tax financing, such
as Colombia, Ghana, Mexico, Rwanda or Thailand.

39

Barrientos 2010.

The positive effects of social insurance include reduced risk, improved coping mechanisms, and consumption
smoothing.40 By building resilience, particularly in rural settings, social insurance can allow individuals to take
productive risks. When social insurance reliably reduces the risk of deprivation faced by households, these no
longer need to worry about a temporary shock having devastating, permanent effects on their well-being.
Thus, they can move towards higher-return investments that imply more risk.41
Social services will be considered as social protection instruments, for the purpose of this primer, when they
refer to efforts to ensure availability, continuity, and access to essential public services such as water and
sanitation, health, education and household- and individually-focused social work support. Social services,
such as early child care, have the potential to reduce the burden of unpaid care and domestic work.
Labour market interventions improve access to productive and decent employment. Active labour market
policies aim to help the unemployed and other jobseekers find jobs, through interventions such as job centres
and training. Other relevant policies include changes to legislation and measures to ensure the effective
implementation of these policies, for example establishing a minimum wage or promoting safe working
conditions. Labour market interventions must recognize and aim to address the constraints that women face in
accessing decent employment because of the expectation that they perform unpaid care and domestic work.

table 4.1 taxonomy of social protection instruments
Category

Programmes

Benefits

Social transfers

Cash transfers: unconditional cash transfers,
conditional transfers, child grants, foster care
grants, housing allowance, emergency support,
scholarships, old age pensions, disability allowance/
benefits, war veterans benefits, burial allowances,
cash for work, payment for environmental services

Increased income,
consumption, expenditure
and asset accumulations,

Food, in-kind or near-cash transfers: food
stamps and vouchers, supplementary feeding,
school feeding, nutrition programmes, emergency
support, health subsidies or waivers, education
subsidies or waivers, agricultural subsidies, housing
subsidies, utility subsidies, food for work

increased human capital
accumulations,
improved health outcomes,
reduced unpaid care and
domestic work

Other transfers: land tax exceptions
Social insurance

40
41

Old-age pension, survivor pension, disability
pension, unemployment insurance, sickness/
injury insurance, maternity/paternity benefits,
health insurance

Maintaining levels of consumption even when levels of income fall due to shocks or crises.
Barrett and McPeak 2004.

Increased income,
consumption, expenditure
and asset accumulation,
reduced exposure to
risk, improved coping
mechanisms, consumption
smoothing

35

Category

Programmes

Benefits

Social services

Children: day care services for children/orphans,
early childhood development programmes,
foster care, specialized care for children
(abandoned, neglected, abused, orphaned), nonresidential psychological services, social care for
substance abuse

Reduced unpaid care and
domestic work, improved
health outcomes,

Family: preservation and unification counselling
services, domestic violence victims services,
rehabilitation services, community development
services, mother care and counselling services

increased human capital
formation,
reduced gender-based
violence

Working Age: social care for the homeless,
immigrant counsel and care services
People living with disabilities (PLWD):
residential care for PLWD, psychosocial care,
personal assistance and day care, transportation
services specialized for PLWD
Labour market
policies

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

36

Informal social
protection

Intermediation services, training (vocational,
life skills, cash for training), job rotation and job
sharing, employment incentives/wage subsidies,
employment measures for PLWD, public works
and direct job creation, start-up incentives (cash
and in-kind loans), unemployment benefits
(contributory and non-contributory), early
retirement based on labour market

Increased employment
both by increasing both
the supply and demand of
labour,

Funeral insurance services, village grain banks,
rotating services and credit groups, communitybased health insurance

Consumption smoothing,
reductions in unpaid care
and domestic work

improved labour conditions

Other relevant interventions
Legislation and
Transformative
policies42

Institutional: legislation on economic, social
and cultural rights, anti–corruption measures,
citizen juries
Societal: sensitization and anti–discrimination
campaigns (i.e. HIV/AIDS anti–stigma campaign)
Legal: minimum wage legislation, workers’ rights
legislation (e.g. maternity leave), children’s rights
(laws against child labour), social funds that
invest in infrastructure pertinent to the poor,
agricultural policies that improve productivity of
small land owners

Remove barriers for
marginalized groups
Improved outcomes
(income) and opportunities
for all, reductions in unpaid
care and domestic work;
reductions in gender-based
violence, reductions in
social conflicts

4.2

Assessment Based National Dialogues: Building coherent national
social protection strategies

Building social protection systems is a long and continuous process. The Assessment Based National Dialogue
(ABND) exercise is the first step towards the achievement of nationally defined social protection floors and
comprehensive social protection systems. This national dialogue helps formulate relevant and feasible policy
options, based on a collaborative assessment of the social protection situation and cost estimations for
coverage reform and expansion. It involves all relevant ministries (labour, social welfare, health, education,
planning commission, finance, agriculture, and so on), national social protection schemes and programmes,
research institutions and statistics offices, employers’ and workers’ representatives, civil society organizations
and UN agencies who formulate recommendations in line with government strategies and international
commitments, and who advocate for these recommendations to ensure that they can be translated into
concrete action. 42
The ABND provides an opportunity to “deliver as One-UN” on social protection in line with the 2030 Agenda. It is
also a practical methodology and process to plan social protection pillars as part of the UNDAF. All UN agencies
involved in the Social Protection Floor Initiative (UNDP, ILO, UNICEF, WHO, UNFPA, UNAIDS, UNESCO, UN WOMEN,
WFP, FAO and others) usually take part in a national ABND. Each agency has core competencies in different areas,
which, when combined, create an unparalleled body of expertise and more efficient division of labour.
The ABND follows a three-step approach43:
Step 1. Development of the assessment matrix. The four guarantees of the social protection floor (SPF) (e.g.
access to health care, social protection for children, social protection for the working age group, and old
age pensions) are used as benchmarks to measure existing social protection and other poverty alleviation
programmes, identify policy gaps and implementation issues, and produce recommendations for the design
and implementation of further social protection provisions with the aim of guaranteeing at a minimum the SPF
to all the population. The assessment matrix is compiled in close collaboration with all relevant stakeholders,
using face-to-face consultations and workshops at both national and sub-national levels.
Step 2. Rapid Assessment Protocol (RAP)—The cost of the proposed social protection provisions is then
estimated and projected over a 10-year period using the ILO Rapid Assessment Protocol (RAP). This costing
exercise can serve as a basis for discussions on available fiscal space, government budget reallocations, and
the prioritization of different social protection policy options. After costing the different scenarios through
the RAP exercise, the parameters of the different scenarios are fine-tuned at participatory costing workshops
on social protection.
Step 3. Finalization)—The finalized assessment report is handed over to the government for endorsement
and decisions on next steps.
In Thailand for instance, social protection was chosen as one of the six key areas of partnership between the
Royal Thai Government and the United Nations system within the United Nations Partnership Framework
(UNPAF). To enhance Thailand’s capacity to provide universal basic social protection and higher levels of
benefits, a UN Social Protection Floor (UNSPF) Joint Team, including the ILO, UNICEF, UNDP, UNFPA, UNESCO,
UN WOMEN, and WHO, was created in March 2010. From June 2011 to October 2012, the UNSPF Joint Team

42
43

While legislation and transformative policies are often not strictly social protection policies, if implemented alongside social
protection instruments to remove structural barriers and address the needs of marginalized people, they can have a truly
transformative effect on social inclusion, and thus are worth mentioning here.
ILO 2016a.

37

engaged line ministries, social partners, civil society organizations, academia and other relevant stakeholders
in the conduct of an Assessment Based National Dialogue (ABND) to assess the social protection situation. This
18-month process drew up appropriate policy recommendations for the achievement of a comprehensive
social protection floor in Thailand. In the wake of the launch of the SPF Assessment Report in 2013, Thailand
adopted a child support grant in 2015 and is considering the introduction of a long-term care scheme. The
assessment also contributed to the publication of the ABND good practices guide, which is a unique resource
package that provides step-by-step support for conducting an ABND exercise.

4.3

Linking programmes: A systemic view

Social protection programmes are often fragmented, falling under the responsibility of different line ministries,
public organizations and local governments, and developed as a response to specific problems without
building on or offering complementarities with other programmes or broader public policies. Although
significant advancements have been made by tackling development objectives separately and great expertise
and problem-solving ability have been developed at the international and country levels, integrating social
protection into systems and programmes that deal with issues simultaneously has proven difficult.
Fragmentation occurs at various levels: (i) among sectors (e.g. health, education and social security); (ii) in
coverage for formal and informal worker; and (iii) at different stages in the life cycle, when the transition
from one stage to another is left uncovered. Fragmentation can happen at the policy level and at the
implementation/delivery level. To avoid gaps, overlaps, and inefficiencies, the roles and responsibilities of the
different stakeholders need to be defined and their actions coordinated.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

38

The danger of fragmented programmes is that even if they alleviate the immediate consequences of poverty
at certain points in people’s lives, they may fail to address the underlying causes of deprivation and exclusion
and to ensure that individuals do not fall behind when transitioning from one stage in life to another, or when
shocks occur. For example, education programmes that do not support the school-to-work transition process
or establish links to labour markets often do not succeed in enabling individuals to increase their productivity
and accumulate the assets they need to escape poverty and deprivation in the long term. People often have
multiple social protection needs and require a package of complementary services and transfers (such as
food, education, and child support grants; income support and vocational training) that demand coordination
between institutions from the policy development stage to the practical implementation of SPF components.
The taxonomy described above provides a coherent framework to organize programmes. However, when
designing systems of social protection, the interaction and complementarities among these programmes
must be considered in the context of the established objectives as well as their differentiated impact on men
and women. A systemic view of social protection organizes programmes around the objectives set out at the
country level. Thus, instead of independently operated programmes, a social protection system should be
focused on how programmes interact and complement each other across objectives.44

44

Robalino et al. 2012

Table 4.2 Linkages between Instruments and Objectives in a Social Protection System
Objective/Target
Group

Instruments

Transfers

Insurance

Services

Legislation and
transformative
policies

Labour
Market

Income Poverty

X

X

X

X

X

Childhood

X

X

X

X

Maternity

X

X

X

X

Unemployment

X

X

X

X

Sickness/Injury

X

X

X

X

Disability

X

X

X

X

Old Age

X

X

X

X

X

X

Source: Based on Robalino et al., 2012.

Linking programmes with similar objectives or target population groups can improve the overall performance
of the system and of the individual programmes. For example, cash transfers can be more effective in
preventing poverty and helping people enter employment when they are joined up with measures that ease
the burden of unpaid care and domestic work for men and women and develop their skills and employability
through the provision of high-quality services such as skills development programmes.
Coordination can happen at various levels of the policy cycle. Ideally, it is integrated within the legal and policy
frameworks, such as the social protection strategy, in place. Thus, objectives are aligned, and instruments chosen
and combined to reach those objectives. Additionally, appropriate bodies for oversight, policy implementation
and coordination across government and non-government actors should be appointed with an explicit mandate
and mechanisms to take effective actions toward programme coordination. The coordination must be at the
national level among the institutions and the ministries responsible for developing national social protection
policies; among the different levels of government (federal, national, regional, municipal) to guarantee the
implementation of the defined policies, the financial sustainability of social benefits and their efficient and
decentralized distribution to beneficiaries; and at the management level to guarantee cost reductions and
greater administrative transparency and efficiency.
Coordination is also critical in the planning and implementation of programmes, where relevant actors plan joint
actions that maximize benefits and reduce trade-offs. Coordination at the delivery level can help facilitate the use of
similar information management systems, delivery systems and shared information and knowledge. Coordination
at the financing level could allow the pooling of resources from various actors towards one set of interventions.
To improve coordination at the policy and implementation level, UN agencies have developed, as part
of the UNDG Asia-Pacific Thematic Working Group on social protection, a UNDG Coordination Toolkit. It
provides an opportunity to “deliver as One-UN” on social protection in line with the 2030 Agenda. It is also

39

a practical methodology and process to analyse
the country’s current social protection system
and decentralization policies and to assess gaps
and issues in the delivery, coordination, and
monitoring and evaluation of the social protection
system. This analysis is then followed by concrete
recommendations to improve coordination at policy
development, delivery, monitoring and evaluation
levels. UN agencies can then support national
stakeholders in the practical implementation of
the processes, tools and information management
systems required for the implementation of the
coordination mechanism.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

40

The link between social protection programmes
and labour markets merits special attention. Social
protection can be effective in improving the lives of
women and men in the long term if it helps them in
the transition towards productive employment and
sustainable livelihoods. In doing so, careful policy
design ensures that the right incentives are set for
people to engage in decent employment. Thus it is
important for social protection programme designs
to include incentives for transitioning to productive
employment where appropriate, to build the
productive capacities of individuals, and to reduce
unpaid care and domestic work.
Some public works programmes have explicit
training objectives, which aim to result in long-term
employment opportunities once people exit the
programme. In Ethiopia’s PSNP, social protection is
implemented alongside complementary training
programmes, in order to simultaneously promote
employability and consumption smoothing
simultaneously. The programme ensures that
immediate consumption needs are met while skills
are acquired.
Countries with well-integrated systems of social
protection include Brazil and Chile. Brazil’s poverty
eradication strategy, Brasil sim Miseria, launched in
2011, comprises 120 public actions targeting 16.3
million extremely poor Brazilians. The strategy builds
on Brazil’s 12-year commitment to Bolsa Familia, to
include efforts for social inclusion, improved access
to services, and strengthening the social assistance
network. Chile’s Chile Solidario, noted earlier,
provides a package of programmes tailored to meet
the specific needs of women and men.

Ethiopia’s Productive Safety
Net Programme
One of Africa’s most acclaimed programmes
is Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Programme
(PSNP), a hybrid programme combining cash
transfer and public works. The programme has
reduced poverty and increased food security
in the short run while enabling asset growth in
the long run. It reaches more than seven million
people, or about 10 per cent of the population,
and oversees the implementation of about
34,000 small works projects per year.
Ethiopia is also a good example of institutional
coordination across government institutions and
between the government and donor agencies.
After 30 years of disarticulated emergency food
programmes, in 2005 the PSNP consolidated
funds from donors, which the government
then used. For its part, the government covers
the cost of the civil servants who manage the
programme. All donors are represented on
the government-chaired Joint Coordination
Committee, which meets biweekly to discuss
priority issues. The Food Security Coordination
Directorate and the Natural Resources
Management Directorate at the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development jointly
implement the PSNP. The Ministry of Finance
and Economic Development oversees financial
management of the programme and disburses
cash resources. These federal implementation
arrangements are replicated in regions and
subregions (woredas). Within the regions, the
ultimate authority for the PSNP resides in the
regional council, which is the highest regionallevel decision-making body (Monchuk 2013).
In terms of operation, the PSNP has a single
payment system for both components—i.e.,
cash transfer and public works—which increases
efficiency and complementarity (Lieuw-KieSong 2011).
Sources: UNDP, 2015d; Monchuk 2013; Lieuw-Kie-Song
2011.

4.4

Universal vs. targeted social protection programmes

UNDP is a proponent of universal social protection. This refers to an integrated set of policies that ensures
that anyone who needs social protection has access to it. In fact universal social protection is a goal endorsed
by most development agencies, including the ILO, the World Bank, the African Union, ASEAN, the European
Commission, G20, OECD and the United Nations. The ILO and the World Bank, together with other partners,
recently launched the Global Partnership for Universal Social Protection Initiative.45
Universal social protection coverage can be achieved through different means, and in many cases social
protection systems combine universal and targeted programmes. Universal programmes are those available to
everyone, or those in a broad category of the population (such as older persons or children), without consideration
of individual or household income status. Targeted programmes are usually understood as programmes directed
specifically to the poor and vulnerable.
In some policies and programmes, universalism is well established, especially in sectors such as education and
health, considering that universalism benefits the poorest and marginalized.
Other programmes aim to remove specific constraints faced by groups and need to find mechanisms to
concentrate the benefits of programmes on specific segments of the population.46 Targeting is commonly
thought of as a way to channel resources towards the poor; however existing targeting mechanisms often
face difficulties in reaching these groups, often leading to the exclusion of the most vulnerable. As we
move towards more comprehensive social protection systems that address the various dimensions of
deprivations that affect the lives of people, a more comprehensive approach is necessary that incorporates
dimensions of poverty, such as the vulnerability and time poverty that results from unequal allocations of
unpaid care and domestic work.
Targeting defines a beneficiary group and identifies the specific individuals who will receive benefits. In this sense,
the target population can be the poor, but also non-poor women and men who face specific barriers, such as those
at risk because of where they live (for example, a group of people living near a river prone to flooding), those who
face barriers to access labour markets (for example, women with heavy burdens of unpaid care and domestic work),
people with disabilities who lack the means to collect their benefits even if these are provided, etc.
Targeting needs to take into account the national context and identify and mitigate any potential unintended
effects. For example, there are negative reports from Bangladesh that gender-based domestic violence may
increase with transfers to women.47 More therefore needs to be understood about the situations where
women, girls or female-headed households should be preferentially targeted and the most appropriate
mechanism for doing so. Female-headed households are not a homogenous group)—for example, widows
and abandoned mothers are more likely to be poor than women whose husbands provide remittances.48 49
An ongoing debate about social protection has to do with dependency and graduation. The debate springs from the
negative notion that social protection, in particular in the context of cash transfers, can make people dependent, and
increasingly less capable of sustaining their own livelihoods. Many governments are concerned with graduation from
programmes, designing programmes that are temporary and have a clear exit strategy. These are often financially and
politically easier to sell. The fear of generating dependency by distributing cash transfers has motivated very rigorous
targeting methodologies and limited the duration of programme benefits in many countries.50

45
46
47
48
49
50

http://www.social-protection.org/gimi/gess/NewYork.action?id=34
Slater and Farrington 2009.
Luttrell and Moser 2004.
Thakur, Arnold and Johnson 2009.
For more on Targeting see Annex 2
Samson 2015.

41

However, the other side of this debate recognizes a more systemic role for social protection and understands
graduation as exiting poverty or deprivations in general, rather than exiting specific programmes. In this
sense, it looks at social protection as offering bundles of services that complement and supplement each
other depending on the conditions, and stage of life, of the people who benefit from social protection. This
vision of graduation is more closely aligned with the notion of social protection as a contract between right
holders and duty bearers.

4.5

Unified social registries

Information registries and associated integrated management information systems (IMIS) have become
important mechanisms to integrate data and manage information across programmes, and establish links
between them and with other services and sectors.
There are two types of registries used by countries for social protection programmes:

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

42

■■

Social Registries serve many programmes for the purposes of determining eligibility for social
programmes, and therefore contain eligibility-related information on all applicants not just on
beneficiaries (inclusion of non-beneficiary applicants is very important for appeals, dynamism, and the
ability to serve multiple programmes), and

■■

Beneficiary Registries that serve as a backbone for benefits administration, but only contains information
on approved beneficiaries

Many countries are moving towards a unified social registry, to serve multiple programmes as a common
beneficiary system, organized into a database, of all households and individuals interviewed to be registered
into social protection programmes. A unified social registry aims to collect, record and store updated and
historical information on individual and household characteristics and circumstances, to determine eligibility for
certain programmes. The data are usually compiled and unified from the data collection of several programmes
or from a large data collection drive performed by one programme, which is then used by several others in the
social protection sector. These registries are often linked to a software application that determines eligibility
for individual programmes. An IMIS refers to the broader system that enables the flow and management of
information within and between social protection programmes and sometimes beyond to other sectors.51
At an operational level, unified social registries allow for coordination of social protection programmes,
reduce duplication of efforts (for example, of data collection), combat fraud (by keeping track of which
beneficiaries are receiving which benefits), improve efficiencies (for example, common payment systems,
monitoring and evaluation), and ease the transition of beneficiaries between schemes as circumstances
change, thereby ensuring continuation of services as needed. They can potentially also improve social
protection programmes’ responses to emergencies if they are designed to include records of households
that are vulnerable.
For example, Kenya’s Single Registry consolidates information from five of the country’s main programmes:
the Hunger Safety Net Programme; the Persons with Severe Disability Programme; the Older Persons Cash
Transfer; the Urban Food Subsidy Programme; and the Orphans and Vulnerable Children Programme. The
single registry consolidates information, including targeting, registration and enrolment, payments, and
grievance mechanisms, across different processes of the country’s social protection programmes.52

51
52

Barca and Chirchi 2014.
Barca and Chirchi 2014.

Another example is the new National Households Registry in Ghana, which identifies potential beneficiaries
for all social protection programmes. In many countries individuals receive information about social
protection programmes in ways that are passive or semi-passive, i.e., the state relies on the mobilization of
the potential beneficiaries by radio, TV or occasional visits by social workers to stimulate the target groups
to visit the registry centres. However, the model that has been designed for Ghana implies an active search
process, registering target households. It is a very recent initiative. The design may bring some solutions for
Mauritius, which is seeking to develop a similar initiative.
Unified social registries can also improve common targeting across programmes by minimizing errors
of exclusion and inclusion, reducing the costs associated with collecting data for each programme and
improving the transparency of targeting mechanisms. Brazil is a good example of a unified social registry
that consolidates targeting from many of the country’s programmes. Brazil’s Unified Registry for Social
Programmes (Cadastro Unico) was established in 2001 and contains information about more than 21 million
households. It was initially built using data from the country’s large conditional cash transfer programme
(Bolsa Familia). A large majority of Brazil´s social programmes select beneficiaries on the basis of information
contained in the Unified Registry.53
Finally, unified social registries also facilitate the integration of operations and services into one entry point for
beneficiaries. This entry point, also known as Single Window Service or One-Stop Shop, consolidates services
so that families need to approach only a single office, ideally at the subnational level, where they can access
information and register for a number of services provided by the social protection system and links to other
sectors. In many instances, individuals are assigned a social worker who evaluates their needs and proposes
an integrated package of programmes relevant to them and their households. This reduces beneficiaries’ time
and money costs to access services, and improves coordination and information. It also increases outreach,
integrates social protection interventions with other sectors (for example, maternal and child health); links
social protection to employment programmes (for example, access to health care for those enrolled under
public work programmes); empowers subnational institutions involved in designing, administering and
overseeing the Single Window Service; and facilitates overall coordination and monitoring and evaluation.

53

https://wwp.org.br/sites/default/files/introduction_to_brazils_unified_registry.pdf.

43

REACHING THOSE
LEFT BEHIND:
making social protection
inclusive

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

44

Inclusive social protection emphasizes
the need to reach everyone that needs
to be reached, addressing deprivation
in all areas that matter for well-being,
beyond income poverty; it recognizes
the need to make social protection
sensitive to the specific needs and
constraints faced by different groups, as
well as how these needs and constraints
interact with each other.

5

Paying special attention to those left behind, to ensure inclusive systems, will be critical for the success of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; it corresponds to the recent SDG Declaration: “We pledge that no
one will be left behind… And we will endeavour to reach the furthest behind first.”
The focus on inclusiveness also directly follows UNDP’s mandate as stated in the Strategic Plan’s proposed
outcomes to help countries move towards growth and development that is inclusive (Outcome 1), strengthen
institutions to progressively deliver universal access to basic services (Outcome 3), and foster progress in
reducing gender inequality (Outcome 4).
For social protection systems to be inclusive, they have to look beyond income poverty and address deprivations
and vulnerabilities in the many dimensions that matter for well-being. These include social, economic and
environmental vulnerabilities, income poverty and marginalization. They have to understand the barriers
that stand between the poor and most vulnerable groups, such as (documented and undocumented)
migrant workers, refugees, people with health disabilities and HIV and marginalized groups such as the LGBT
community, drug users and many others, and access to social protection. Social protection that goes beyond
income redistribution includes reforms that tackle social exclusion, such as legal and policy reforms to change
disempowering and discriminatory social norms and practices and to create a social environment that would
enable and encourage the most marginalized to register, access, and benefit from social protection.
The inclusion of traditionally left behind groups not only has to do with what is done (programmes and
systems described above) but also with how they are implemented and resources distributed.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

46

From this perspective, this section will focus on inclusive social protection that: (i) reaches everyone that
needs to be reached, addressing deprivation in all areas that matter for well-being, beyond income poverty,
and (ii) is sensitive to the specific needs and constraints faced by different groups, as well as how these needs
and constraints interact with each other.

5.1

Reaching all that need to be reached: Expanding coverage

For social protection to move from a poverty reduction strategy to one of sustainable poverty eradication,
coverage is an important aspect of design and funding. As social protection programmes have grown, so
has the recognition that certain groups are traditionally left behind. Even where universal social protection
frameworks exist, certain segments of the population, particularly those that experience discrimination and
exclusion, face challenges accessing services and programmes. Targeted programmes that reach out to these
groups, overcoming the barriers they face, can be a powerful mechanism to ensure that “no one is left behind”.
A vast number of countries have embarked on reforms to expand coverage to rural populations, older people,
ethnic minorities, informal workers, migrants, and many other groups.
Actively searching for beneficiaries is one innovation for reaching people left behind. This model impliles that
state workers actively seek out beneficiaries, particularly in remote areas, instead of waiting for them to come
forward to request services. Brasil sim Miseria is a good example. Before 2011, one of the greatest challenges of
the strategy, despite Government efforts and funding increases, was reaching the most deprived and isolated.
Either because of lack of identification, migration, residence in isolated or remote areas, or lack of information,
many of those eligible for benefits did not claim them. In 2011, to promote social and economic inclusion
of Brazilians living in extreme poverty, the Ministry of Social Development and Fight Against Hunger, in
partnership with other ministries, states and municipalities, implemented Busca Ativa (active search), a strategy
to locate extremely poor families and include them in the Cadastro Unico and to link them to programmes
such as Bolsa Familia and Bolsa Verde to foster productive activities. The active search also aims to ensure that
the poorest families have access to basic services. According to the Ministry of Social Development, since
2011 almost 800,000 families have been identified, registered and included in the programme.

Other countries, particularly middle income ones, have focused efforts on expanding health and pension coverage
for those outside the contributory system. Pensions in particular have been extended to many older people who
would otherwise not be covered by formal contributory insurance pensions and depend on their families and social
networks for financial support and social care. Old-age pensions cover less than 10 per cent of the population over
statutory age in more than 40 countries including Indonesia, Yemen, Honduras and Kenya.54 Some of these countries
apply a means test to determine beneficiaries or the level of benefits, and other criteria including age, location
and family composition. Other countries apply a universal scheme where anyone over a certain age is eligible.
Mauritius, for example, has established a non-contributory universal pension scheme funded by the state budget.
The programme is significantly contributing to ensuring income security during a fast demographic transition,
reducing income inequality and building social cohesion.55 Similar schemes have been established in Bolivia,
Lesotho, Namibia, Nepal, among others. Furthermore, its success is embedded in a progressive economic, social,
and political policy agenda that includes: investing in free health care and education for all; widespread government
ownership; reduced military spending; strong commitment to democratic institutions; and cooperation among
workers, government and employers. Other countries such as Bangladesh, Nepal, Peru, South Africa, Thailand, Viet
Nam and Zambia have also extended non-contributory pensions and health with important results.
Existing evidence demonstrates that social pensions contribute to the spending of older people on basics
such as food, health care, and expenses associated with social and ceremonial activities.56 Research from South
Africa, for example, shows that the state’s old-age non-contributory pension reduces poverty and inequality
and is used for income-generating purposes by the elderly themselves as well as other household members.57
Expansion of social protection is also critical to provide coverage to those of active working age that are not
benefiting from the formal labour market. This can include informal workers both in urban and rural settings
including domestic workers not covered by contributory systems. It can also include those whose principal
responsibility is unpaid care and domestic work. Even when eligible for voluntary contributory systems,
many informal workers find requirements and criteria too burdensome and expensive. To encourage this
population’s participation, it may therefore be necessary to adapt administrative processes and financing
arrangements rules to the situation of informal workers, to ensure their effective coverage both during their
active period of work and during retirement.
Some countries have increased the flexibility allowed in contributory systems to address coverage of informal
workers. For example, Chile has adopted flexible contributions to encourage participation of agricultural workers,
whose income is highly volatile by season and vulnerable to unforeseen conditions. In this way, when yields
are good, agricultural workers can make larger pension contributions than the norm, and when yields suffer
due to unexpected conditions (e.g. flooding or pest problems), they can lower the level of contribution.58 Tax
incentives and and subsidized contributions for those with low earnings flexibility are other ways to strengthen
participation in pension systems.
Other countries have provided targeted comprehensive social protection to informal workers in particular
sectors where the needs are known to be large. The Bidi Welfare Fund in India, for example, provides social
protection for workers, mostly women, employed in producing bidis, small, hand-rolled cigarettes. The welfare
fund, set up by either the central or state government, is funded through a bidi export tax and provides
medical care, education for children, housing, water, and recreational facilities.59

54
55
56
57
58
59

ILO 2015b.
UNDP 2015d.
Handayani and Babajanian 2012.
OECD 2009.
Hu and Stewart 2009.
Cameron 2014.

47

Reaching out to the traditionally left behind also often implies exploring community-based mechanisms of
social protection, which tend to be decentralized and flexible. Community-based social protection (CBSP)
is usually defined as an informal grouping of activities that protect community members from risk through
“locally arranged social protection measures that are predicated on people’s cultural beliefs, norms and values.”60
Community-based insurance mechanisms are probably the most common form of CBSP. However, it is difficult
to extend coverage with these mechanisms. Today, development work focuses on expanding coverage and
building universal social protection systems.
There are some instances of CBSP that have successfully expanded and linked to state programmes. The SelfEmployed Women’s Association (SEWA) in India is a good example of the potential of CBSP. Started in 1972 in
Gujarat by a few women employed seasonally in the textile industry, SEWA has grown into a trade union of
self-employed women with more than 200,000 members. It provides health, life, asset, and loan insurance, as
well as maternity benefit, to more than 30,000 members.
Expanding coverage of social protection presents a number of challenges related to affordability and
institutional capacity. It is often expensive to reach those traditionally left behind, as they may be cut off from
information. It also requires local capacities in remote and isolated areas. Furthermore, the socially excluded
often lack the voice or agency to participate meaningfully in the decision-making processes that affect
their lives. This lack of agency and political participation further entrenches social exclusion and thus limits
the transformative effects of social protection interventions. Efforts are needed to make social protection
everyone’s business and promote it as a tool for many sectors.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

48

5.2

Sensitization of social protection: Addressing needs and
overcoming barriers

For social protection to reach certain groups, programmes and processes must be adapted to those groups’ needs
and constraints. Much has been written, for example, on gender-sensitive or child-sensitive social protection
that optimizes positive effects and minimizes potential adverse consequences for these specific groups.
There is certainly a trend towards social protection that is inclusive and addresses the barriers and specific needs
of excluded groups. This is apparent in evaluations of some of the largest programmes around the world. The
women’s participation rate in India’s MGNREGA is much higher than the national labour force participation rates
for women, due partly to the introduction of child-care measures in the programme design.61 Marginalized tribes
and castes are disproportionately represented on the programme compared with their share of the population.
Evaluations of Mexico’s Oportunidades programme, a large CCT programme that reaches over 6 million
households, found that it has performed well in terms of reaching 94 per cent of indigenous people,
who are historically poorer and difficult to reach with government services. However, the poverty impact
of Oportunidades has been lower for indigenous people. It is argued that this is due to supply factors)—for
instance, the quality of education services provided to communities is below national standards)—and because
they face “a lack of social mobility and discrimination in the labour market”.62 63 This illustrates that increasing the
uptake of education and health services does not immediately result in improved well-being. Other factors
come into play, such as the quality of the services on offer, the adequacy of the service to serve the needs of a
specific community, and the compounding barriers that certain groups face when transitioning to labour markets.

60
61
62
63

Mupedziswa and Ntseane 2013.
Ghosh and others 2008.
Ulrichs and Roelen 2012.
Gonzalves de la Rocha 2009.

Much can be done in the design and implementation of social protection to ensure that it supports social
inclusion. In terms of gender equality, for example, the objectives of social inclusion presuppose that the
gendered division of labour must change. Temporary or permanent personal care and caring for other
members of the household and family, such as children, old or disabled people, addicts and ill people are
time-consuming activities, disproportionately assumed by women. The time taken to carry them out may
have direct important consequences for the well-being of those who provide such care. Thus, maternity
dynamics and the unpaid care and domestic work the “hard core” underpinning the gendered division of
labour and a contributing factor to social exclusion, vulnerability and poverty)— have to be reconfigured.64
As the UNDP MDG evaluation finds, there has been progress in that direction, but the impact that the absence
of a universal social security system has on women, as well as how unpaid care and domestic work and the
obligation to provide family care are at the very heart of poverty and vulnerability among women, but not
among men.65
Even in programmes where women are defined as the main target group, women tend to benefit less from
social programmes due to specific intra-household relations. Some social programmes even reinforce traditional
gender roles and responsibilities, and thereby diminish women’s ability to strengthen their position in society.66
For example, some argue that conditional cash transfers (CCTs), an important form of social protection,
reinforce gender stereotypes. Many programmes assume that women are available to carry out the unpaid
care and domestic work-related obligations associated with CCTs without consideration of their breadwinning
responsibilities or need for paid work, and to the neglect of any recognition of men’s responsibilities to contribute
to unpaid care and domestic work. Some Brazilian experts have commented that Bolsa Familia utilizes the
“culture of mothering” without necessarily supporting the personal progress of women as active citizens.67
In Ecuador some evidence about the Bono de Desarrollo Humano (BDH) CCT programme suggests that when
one of the requirements of the programme was that the household was not part of the national social security
system, mothers receiving a benefit were more likely to remain unemployed and less likely to seek formal
employment. This restriction was lifted in 2009. However, new rules regarding the proxy means tests also
disqualify households employed in the formal sector.68
Additionally, women are more likely to be excluded from various social protection interventions as they are
systematically underrepresented in formal sector employment. Social security measures in many developing
countries tend to be restricted to the small, male-dominated section of the workforce employed in the formal
state and private sector. In this case, poor women’s interests can be served by extending social insurance to
informal workers, including own-account and contributing family workers. For many women, this is the main
source of income.
Lack of time in some cases may be minor, but in other instances it can be forbidding, preventing the
attainment of even a bare-bones living standard. Should a household officially classified as non-poor be
facing a time deficit, and should it also not have the option to make up for it by purchasing market substitutes,
that household will be encountering deprivations not reflected in the official poverty numbers. In other
words, though many may experience time pressures on an occasional or daily basis, for some segments of the
population such time deficits are literally poverty-inducing but invisible to official income poverty as well as
to multidimensional measurements of poverty.69

64
65
66
67
68
69

UNDP 2013.
Blixen 2015.
UNDP and UNCDF 2013.
Thakur, Arnold and Johnson 2009.
Ordoñez and others 2015.
Antonopoulos, Masterson and Zacharias 2012.

49

Time Poverty, Gender and Social
Protection: An illustrative example
Consider two households with identical incomes just above
the poverty threshold (taking into account differences in
household size and using appropriate equivalency scales).
The first household consists of two adults, one of whom
participates in full-time paid work, while the other performs
most of the unpaid household production and maintenance
activities. The second household has two members who are
full-time paid workers and two young children. Both of these
households will have the same poverty ranking. Upon closer
examination, the second household lacks time to perform
necessary household activities (including caring for children),
and the resources to purchase market substitutes.
As a result, despite identical incomes, these households of
largely disparate levels of access to a minimum set of goods
and services are given the same poverty ranking. More
importantly, bridging income gaps, without addressing timedeficits at the same time, may result in an overall deterioration
of living standards for some households and individuals.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

50

Standard measurements of income poverty, as well as
multidimensional poverty, tacitly assume that all households
and individuals have enough time to attend to the daily
household needs of their members. If poverty is not measured
accurately, its real breadth and depth remain invisible, and its
underlying causes are not fully accounted for, and thus less
likely to be redressed by policies using traditional sectoral
and fragmented approaches.
To promote equitable, inclusive and resilient societies it is
necessary to shed light on hidden deprivations and consider
the range of interconnected mitigation policies, including
social protection. The Levy Institute Measure of Time-Income
Poverty (LIMTIP), which integrates household production
time requirements with income requirements, shows that
awareness of gender differences (in this instance, unpaid
work) can bring to the forefront a “missing” but key analytical
category that allows for an improved measurement of poverty
and a deeper and more precise poverty classification of
households and individuals, as well as a more efficient policy
response. Such a lens allows a better allocation of diverse
social support measures, increasing the efficiency of public
investment on social spending. For instance, some segments
of the population require direct cash transfers, others will
mostly benefit from in-kind government services, others from
public service job creation, yet other types of households may
require specific combinations of all of the above.

In response to these challenges, more
efforts are required to ensure that social
protection programmes address genderspecific barriers to access, including the
distribution of unpaid care and domestic
work. Some modalities and mechanisms
that can improve women’s access to social
protection are family- friendly provisions,
such as availability of social care and flexible
schedules, efforts to raise awareness and
provide women with information on
their social protection rights, and gendersensitivity training to service providers
and other stakeholders who implement
programmes.
Uruguay is an example of important strides
in more gender-sensitive social protection.
Specifically, it provides transfers for every
child or minor in the household and has
worked to position social care services as a
critical complement to social protection, to
allow women to balance work and family
life. UNDP, in collaboration with other
agencies and civil society, has worked to
generate evidence about the use of time
and care, provided support to advocacy
efforts and an exchange of relevant
international experiences, and was able to
position early childhood, disability, old age,
and care services in the Government’s social
protection agenda. This allows women to
better balance work and family life, and
improves their access to labour markets.
The country has also made great strides
in extending unemployment benefits to
domestic workers, a predominantly female
occupation.
In other countries, making social protection
gender-sensitive includes affirmative action
measures. Such was the case in El Salvador,
where UNDP supported the Government in
mainstreaming gender into the Universal
System of Social Protection, specifically
into its main programme, “Comunidades
Solidarias”. The mainstreaming exercise
resulted in education grants for young
mothers and pregnant women, gender
violence prevention measures, priority land
titling for women, and a 60 per cent quota

for women in cash-for-work programmes. Additionally, the programme is now being monitored with sexdisaggregated data, which allows monitoring the progress of women, and will help influence gender-sensitive
policy design and implementation in the future. In Viet Nam, UNDP helped lay the groundwork for collecting
much needed sex-disaggregated and gender-sensitive information as part of a research programme on
social protection. Similarly, a module on gender and social protection has been added to the Gender and
Economic Policy Management training materials which are aimed at sensitizing economic policy makers to
the differentiated aspects of economic policies on women and men.
Ethiopia’s PSNP has tailored its programme to include specific groups. To improve women’s participation, it
makes provisions for childcare at its work sites, by including within the daily tasks the appointment of one
person to mind children who is paid the same rate as other participants. It also allows women to work fewer
hours than men for the same pay, and facilitates a switch to direct support when women are pregnant or
breastfeeding. In this way, the programme has an impact on unpaid care and domestic work. The programme
also aims to empower women in rural society by mandating their participation in programme structures and
decision-making bodies at community levels.
The Banzir Income Support Programme (BISP) in Pakistan, a cash transfer aimed at smoothing consumption,
particularly among women, has provided women with access to the National ID cards and bank accounts.
Since the introduction of BISP, the female registration of Computerized National Identity Cards (CNICs) has
almost doubled, which can potentially open avenues for their socio-economic and political empowerment.70
Mechanisms to move towards more gender-sensitive social protection, that address potential intra-household
conflicts, include: (i) strong gender analysis during social protection intervention design, such as gendersensitive vulnerability assessments; (ii) capacity-building on the part of social protection case workers or
agents to address intra-household relationships and peaceful conflict management as an integral part of
case management; (iii) engagement with men and their peers (such as influential elders, religious leaders) to
promote different types of behaviours.

70

World Bank, 2015a.

51

Gender-sensitive Vulnerability
Assessment
Gender-sensitive vulnerability assessments can be
important tools in the design of social protection
strategies or programmes, recognizing that women are
systematically more vulnerable and marginalized among
the poor, and subject to discrimination and burdens of
unpaid work. Such assessments bring to light how men,
women, boys and girls often experience economic and
social risks differently. Due to gender norms, and roles
and responsibilities, their vulnerability to the same risks
can vary as can their exposure to different types of risks.
When designing a social protection intervention, it is
therefore of the utmost importance to consider how
these experiences of different economic and social
risks intersect at the individual, intra-household and
community levels, and potentially reinforce one another,
hindering the realization of full human capabilities.

52

Some gender-related themes considered when
conducting a gender-sensitive vulnerability assessment71 include:

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

■■

■■

Time use patterns among men, women, girls
and boys, and how these are distributed between
income-generating and unpaid care and domestic
work within and outside the household, as well as
leisure time;
Intra-household balance of power and decisionmaking, which affects the use of labour within
and outside the household and the ownership and
use of resources, incomes and assets, including
productive assets;

■■

Lifecycle-related stresses, such as expenses
related to marriages, births, or funerals;

■■

Costs associated with ill-health, and the ways
these are distributed among men and women
(e.g. do coping strategies have differential
implications for assets owned by men compared
with women?);

■■

Gender-based violence at the intra-household
and community level, including the absence of
safe spaces for women;

■■

Intra-household informal forms of social
protection that reflect the fact that unpaid

71

Holmes and Jones 2010.

care and domestic work reduce the risks faced
by individuals and households, facilitate the
ability of individuals and households to meet
their needs, and in so doing contribute to their
capacity to claim individual and collective rights.
In these ways unpaid care and domestic work
is, without doubt, the most important primary
source of social protection for individuals;
■■

Other informal safety nets and coping strategies, such as support from neighbours and
friends, funeral societies, savings clubs, religious
institutions, distress sale of assets, migration and
remittances sent by family members, and access
to loans for consumption smoothing;

■■

Gendered risks to the realization of full human
capacities for health, nutrition, education and
literacy (this would include an analysis of infant,
child and maternal mortality and morbidity,
stunting, educational attainment, literacy rates
by gender, as well as the distribution of unpaid
care and domestic work);

■■

Opportunities for participation in social
networks, local politics, and decision-making
mechanisms related to social programmes;

■■

Exclusion on the basis of a lack of civic documentation;

■■

Employment and labour market risks, such as
unequal wages, employment insecurity, labour
market segmentation and discrimination, unequal
access to markets (especially in the context of
mobility constraints), and lack of child-care facilities;

■■

Environmental risks and the implications for
livelihood opportunities, coping strategies and
household roles and responsibilities of men,
women, boys and girls. Women are also more
vulnerable to the impact of climate change, and
generally have fewer resources to mitigate risks
or to cope with the aftermath of weather-related
crises. Women face particular difficulties in
accessing and benefiting from basic services such
as health and education, are overrepresented
in the informal economy, and tend to be less
informed about social protection programmes
and social services, resulting in greater exclusion
and more reluctance to make a complaint or seek
redress.72

72

Jones, Stavropoulou and Presler-Marshall 2013.

Special attention also needs to be paid to the needs of other groups, ensuring that social protection
is responsive to their circumstances. For example, evidence shows that people living with HIV (PLVIH)
are particularly vulnerable to falling into poverty and have less access to social protection. Stigma and
discrimination often prevent affected households from accessing existing programmes. Also the multiple,
overlapping and sometimes unique vulnerabilities faced by HIV-affected households are often not recognized
in the design and implementation of conventional targeting mechanisms. For example, the income-based
eligibility criteria used in traditional cash transfers, leave out households affected by HIV/AIDS that are forced
to shift consumptions patterns (e.g. from food, housing and education to health care-related expenses) and
to liquidate assets and savings. HIV-sensitive social protection can reduce vulnerability to HIV, improve and
extend the lives of PLHIV, and support individuals and households.7374
UNDP study in India provides some evidence that PLHIV and their households face severe socio-economic
consequences including exclusion, marginalization and poverty, and are at constant risk of increased illnesses,
loss of jobs and income, rising medical expenses, depletion of savings and other resources, food insecurity,
psychological stress and related morbidity, discrimination, social exclusion and imminent impoverishment
that is often irreversible.75 These risks are more acute in households headed by HIV widows. The severe and
wide-ranging socio-economic impact on PLHIV and their households is further aggravated by stigma and
discrimination and slows down the uptake of HIV prevention and treatment services.
The Royal Government of Cambodia, in collaboration with UNDP, UNAIDS and other development partners,
embarked on a comprehensive process to make social protection schemes in the country sensitive and
inclusive to the needs of people affected by HIV. A socio-economic impact study to better understand the
household-level impacts of HIV on human development led to the inclusion of people affected by HIV as a
priority group in the National Social Protection Strategy. To move towards the implementation of the strategy,
a regional High Level Technical Consultation on HIV-Sensitive Social Protection for Impact Mitigation was
hosted in Siam Reap, and a comprehensive review of the existing and potential impacts of social protection
schemes on households affected by HIV was carried out. The recommendations derived from the consultations
and review are guiding the actions of the Government in moving towards HIV sensitive social protection.
People living with disabilities (PLWD) also tend to have higher poverty rates than national averages, while
certain barriers in design and implementation keep them from receiving social protection benefits. Some of
the specific constraints include lack of physical mobility that makes it hard for beneficiaries to enrol and collect
benefits, lack of sensitivity to their specific needs, difficulty in linking with labour markets, and a problem with
defining the criteria of “disability” that encompasses a wide range of sub-categories.
Many countries have aimed to surmount these barriers by creating specific programmes and funds aimed
at PLWD. The disability allowance in Nepal, for example, was introduced in 1996, with an aim to improve
the economic vulnerability of disabled and partially disabled people. The allowance reaches around 25,000
people across the country.76

73
74
75
76

Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS 2010.
UNDP 2014b.
UNDP India 2011.
UNDP and UNCDF 2013.

53

MAKING THE LINK
BETWEEN SOCIAL
PROTECTION AND
ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

54

Social protection, as an entry point of
government into the household, has
the potential to improve environmental
outcomes by influencing people’s
behaviour towards more sustainable
management of natural resources and
by reducing households’ vulnerability to
climate risks.

6

The 2030 development agenda and goals link the concerns of “people and the planet”)—recognizing the
interdependence of human well-being and healthy ecosystems. We know that the destruction of the natural
resource base as a result of environmental degradation aggravates deprivations, since the poorest depend
disproportionately on natural resources for their livelihoods. Furthermore, increased deprivations aggravate
environmental degradation if the poor are forced to resort to the overexploiting of natural resources, such
as overfishing and slash-and-burn agriculture, for survival. When comparing the impact of hurricanes on the
shared island of Hispaniola, devastation and loss of life tend to be much more severe in Haiti than in the
neighbouring Dominican Republic due, in part, to the much lower percentage of remaining forest cover in
Haiti following decades of deforestation. Differences in levels of education, political stability and infrastructure
also have a compounding effect.77
Unfortunately, the vital policy links between poverty and inequality reduction and environmental sustainability
are still more often overlooked than integrated into the mainstream in both developed and developing
countries. In the context of the SDGs all governments are committed to poverty reduction and environmental
sustainability. However, many governments continue to believe there are major trade-offs between these goals.
There is still much to be learned in this area of work. The rest of the chapter lays out some links between (i)
social protection and the sustainable use of natural resources; and (ii) social protection and climate risks. It
also discusses programmes that have been successful in bridging these two areas of work, and some general
lessons that can be extracted from successful programmes.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

56

6.1

Social protection and the sustainable use of natural resources

Natural assets make a fundamental contribution to meeting basic needs such as providing livelihoods, shelter,
food, fresh water and energy. Ecosystem services are estimated to contribute between 47 and 89 per cent
of rural incomes, termed the “GDP of the poor” (i.e. the effective GDP or total source of livelihood of rural
and forest-dwelling poor households)78. Loss or degradation of these natural assets, therefore, has serious
implications for the incomes and well-being of the populations that social protection targets.
However, social protection is usually designed with little connection to or consideration for environmental
policy. Similarly, environmental programmes, although much more aware of their social impacts, are not
usually seen in conjunction with social protection programmes. Ultimately, programmes and projects are
often implemented with either exclusively social or environmental objectives, and the way in which the
outcomes in these two areas reinforce each other is often overlooked.
From a social protection perspective, there is a need to recognize the imperative to address risk, regenerate
natural resources and conserve ecosystems to stimulate rural economies, create jobs, increase resilience,
ensure that schemes can have a maximum impact on people’s lives, and prevent the reversals of hard won
gains in well-being. The mechanisms and dynamics through which social protection can contribute to
sustainable natural resource management include:
■■

Increase investment capacity of the poor. Rises in household income, through social protection
benefits, can have a positive impact on land and natural resource management. When adequately
targeted and provided on a regular and predictable basis, social protection can facilitate increased
investment in sustainable productive activities, including inputs, tools and livestock.
Even
small transfer amounts can help the poor overcome liquidity constraints, and provide some

77
78

Webersik and Klose 2010.
TEEB 2010.

insurance against risks that prevent them from investing in activities that improve land yields
in the future.79 A study of the Cash for Relief Programme (CfR) in Ethiopia, for example, aimed
primarily at enabling households hit by crop failure to rebuild their productive assets, finds that
the recipients invested in restoring land productivity, in order to regenerate their livelihoods.80
This suggests that certain social protection interventions can simultaneously reduce land and natural
resource degradation and poverty, while increasing productivity. Examples of such strategies include
public works programmes that promote investments in soil and water conservation and agroforestry;
regular and predictable cash transfers that result in investments in productive assets; and insurance that
lessens the incentives to deplete natural resources.
■■

Providing incentives for adopting positive natural resource management practices. Additionally,
social protection schemes can also be used to directly increase the adoption of sustainable natural resource
management practices. Social protection can be used as a vehicle for disseminating the information,
skills, and equipment necessary for conservation purposes, and creating the incentives for conservation
behaviours. In China, for example, the Conversion of Cropland to Forests Program (CCFP) provides grain and
cash subsidies, migration assistance, energy, irrigation and training to farmers who agree to convert their
cropland to forests. Over the past 16 years, 32 million rural households in 25 provinces have benefited. The
CCFP has increased forest restoration and cover and is the largest poverty alleviation programme in China.81

■■

Easing the transition towards greener economies. Finally, as countries transition towards greener
economies, following their commitments at the COP21 in 2015, it is likely that many economies will
undergo significant structural changes. This transition, despite being necessary, will undeniably
produce winners and losers, with new types of work created and existing jobs disappearing. This is likely to
affect women and men living in poverty disproportionately; they could face significant costs such as rising
energy prices, restricted access to forest resources, and employment loss. Individuals whose occupations
will disappear, and are not equipped with other skills, will not automatically be able to access the new
opportunities provided by the developing greener sectors. 82 Research by UNRISD83 provides examples of
the poorest being harmed by transitions to green economies. For example, large numbers of poor people
and food crop production were displaced in Brazil, India and Indonesia to make way for biofuels, promoted
as an alternative low-carbon energy source. Big hydroelectric dams, built as renewable energy sources,
have led to the relocation of large numbers of forest dwellers, often without adequate compensation.
Social protection can be a mechanism through which governments provide compensation and address
transitional costs. It can serve as a platform to provide incentives for skills training associated with
industrial restructuring and green jobs, increase women’s ability to engage in green economy jobs or
projects by easing care burden responsibilities, and seek co-benefits and transformational change.

To understand the links between social protection and environmental sustainability, it is important to
examine the large number of policies and programmes aimed primarily at the sustainable use of natural
resources, but with proven strong social impacts, and ask: what can social protection learn and adapt from
these programmes? Where can synergies be found to maximize both social and environmental outcomes?
UNDP has decades of experience promoting and implementing conservation efforts that have multiple benefits
and create opportunities for poverty eradication and social inclusion. In the course of implementing projects, UNDP

79
80
81
82
83

FAO, 2015b.
Standing 2007.
FAO 2015a.
Dercon 2012.
UNRISD 2012.

57

recognizes that building local support, based on improving the livelihoods of local people, is likely to improve
the project’s management and sustainability. As early as 2006, a GEF study entitled “The Role of Local Benefits in
Global Environmental Programs”84 examined how social benefits contributed to project success and sustainability.
It concluded that for many GEF-related activities, local and environmental benefits are interlinked, and local
support for improved environmental management is built upon the achievement of benefits at the community
level, which can offset locally incurred costs and generate sustainable support. In a way, the success of conservation
efforts depends on finding appropriate strategies for working with local people. Thus, many of the instruments
used for sustainable natural resource management involve the creation and support of sustainable livelihoods for
communities dependent on natural resources through innovative tools, such as payment for ecosystems services
(PES) and micro-grants. These tools, although conceived as market-based policy instruments with environmental
objectives, mirror social protection instruments, such as cash transfers and start-up support services, very closely.
A few lessons distilled from relevant literature and studies as well as ongoing local experiences in conservation,
with strong impacts on the well-being of the poor and vulnerable that could be used in the context of social
protection policy design, include:
1. Design programmes that merge the priorities of individuals with technical specifications
for sustainable natural resource management, to maximize the impact of both social and
environmental outcomes simultaneously.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

58

For maximizing impact there is a need to integrate social and environmental objectives into programme design
and decision-making. After all, both aspects are integrated into the workings of the real world and affect the
well-being of the poor. A big challenge for this is the institutional home of both social and environmental
programmes, often situated in different ministries. This presents difficulties in bridging the expertise and
experience to address both objectives together.
An interesting example of merged environmental and social concerns at every stage of programme
implementation can be found in Ecosystem Based Adaptation (EBA) Programmes. Ecosystem Based approaches
are defined as “a strategy for integrated water management of land, water and living resources that promotes
conservation and sustainable use in an equitable way. Humans, with their cultural diversity, are an integral
component of ecosystems”.85 The EBA approach recognizes that ecosystems are complex and interact
dynamically with social and environmental systems.
EBA measures have demonstrated significant environmental and social benefits at the local and national
levels, such as enhanced food security, access to clean water, improved livelihoods, strengthened local
capacities to manage natural resources, increased soil moisture and vegetation cover, sustainable grassland
and livestock management, among many others.86 These programmes also provide a means to engage women
and vulnerable groups proactively and give them a voice they did not previously have. In a programme
implemented by UNDP in Panchase, Nepal, for example, women have been active participants in planning
and implementing EBA measures associated with broom grass cultivation, which have resulted in a new
source of income, as well as strengthening bonds between women of different castes.
The design and selection of EBA approaches is very much based on a combination of social and environmental
objectives. For examples, the selection of EBA measures for a mountain ecosystem project in Peru (see table
below), combined criteria to increase the resilience of the population and the ecosystem they depend on,
simultaneously.

84
85
86

GEF Evaluation Office 2006.
https://www.cbd.int/convention/.
UNDP 2015a.

criteria for selecting eba measures for project in nor yauyos cochas landscape reserve in
peru
Are the criteria social
or environmental?
1. Criteria for
Selecting what is
(and is not ) EBA

2. Criteria for
prioritizing
between EBA
options

The measure reduces the population’s vulnerability
to climate change

Social

The measure directly or indirectly increases the
resilience of biodiversity and ecosystem services

Environmental

The measure uses biodiversity and ecosystem
services in a sustainable manner, without damaging
them, and in some cases enhances them

Environmental

Size of affected population

Social

Capacity of the measure to reduce the vulnerability
of the population (efficiency)

Social

Importance of biodiversity and ecosystem services
to the population (prioritizing ecosystem services
that support main productive activities, and
biodiversity used by the population)

Social

Vulnerability of biodiversity and ecosystem services
to climate change

Environmental

Durability and immediacy of the measure

Social and
environmental

Source: Adapted from UNDP 2015b.

One important challenge identified in the implementation of EBA is merging environmental and social
objectives, despite a difference in where and when the benefits materialize. While the environmental
objectives of programmes might be concerned with longer term, larger scale benefits, local communities
often prioritize short term gains and local scale benefits. Understanding and designing programmes that can
deliver both types of benefits is critical for the success of EBA. For example, the mountain EBA project in Peru
generated immediate benefits of enhanced water for increasing agriculture and livestock productivity, as part
of a broader effort to improve ecosystem services. Such short term gains were critical to make the case for EBA
at local level and to secure local commitment.
Another interesting example of combined social and environmental objectives is South Africa’s Working for
Water Programme, implemented by the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (which administers the
programme), the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, and the Department of Agriculture. The
programme employs 20,000 people per year, in 300 projects in nine provinces, and aims to remove waterintensive alien tree and plant species from local habitats while relieving poverty. Since its inception in 1995,

59

the programme has cleared more than one million hectares of alien plant species, releasing 50 million cubic
meters of additional water per annum. Much of this water is used for irrigated agriculture, thereby reducing
local food insecurity. The programme targets marginalized groups as potential employees: it seeks to ensure
that 60 per cent of its staff is female, 20 per cent youth, and 5 per cent living with disabilities.87 The programme
also provides training for workers, not only in the technical skills required for the job, such as herbicide
application, but also small business development and health education.
2. Use established social protection mechanisms for the development of sustainable natural resource
management programmes
In countries where social protection mechanisms are well developed, there is an interesting opportunity to
use them to further programmes that have environmental sustainability objectives. Since the livelihoods of
the poorest are so closely linked to natural resources, social protection information systems that map the poor,
such as registries of beneficiaries, can provide very useful information to inform and target environmental
sustainability policies.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

60

Brazil’s Bolsa Verde is a very clear example of a programme that benefits from a well-established social
protection information system. The programmes has three main objectives: i) ecosystem conservation and
sustainable use; ii) improvement of participants’ quality of life; and iii) income support for the extreme poor
that carry out activities for conservation. The programme builds on Brazil’s successful CCT programme, Bolsa
Familia, providing additional income support to families who live in extreme poverty in rural areas in exchange
for maintenance and sustainable use of natural resources)—improving both forest health and economic
conditions. The programme had provided additional income to 73,000 Brazilian families by the end of 2014.
The targeting for Bolsa Verde combines both socio-economic factors and geographic location. It targets
families that are registered in the Cadastro Unico, the largest single beneficiary registry in the world, receive
other social protection benefits and live in federal protected areas and extractive reserves in the Amazon.88
It targets mainly traditional and indigenous communities, recognizing the important role of these communities
for environmental conservation. It efficiently uses Bolsa Familia’s established beneficiary identification system
and delivery mechanism to identify and reach communities that are in the best position to provide an
environmental service.
Similarly, established social protection programmes can consider adapting the conditions and incentives to
promote the sustainable use of natural resources. For example, conditional cash transfer can be conditional
on reforestation or the adoption of sustainable agricultural practices. In such cases, cash transfers would
correct the market failures that make unsustainable activities more valuable than the sustainable use of
natural resources. Actually, payment for environmental services programmes (PES), in some instances, look
exactly like conditional cash transfer programmes with environmental conditions. However, it is important to
note that PES are designed with the main objective of creating a market-based incentive for a conservation
activity. Thus, beneficiaries of PES are not necessarily the poor; instead they target the managers of natural
resources, such as land owners. Conditional cash transfers with environmental conditions would combine both
environmental and social objectives, and will need to take into account the capacity to monitor compliance
with the conditions and the availability of the supply side factors (school, health centres; seeds, water) to fulfil
any conditions imposed.
Finally, social protection mechanisms can be used to enable beneficiaries to acquire knowledge and skills
on the sustainable use of natural resources. Public works programmes, for example, can require beneficiaries

87
88

UNDP 2012b.
Ramachandran and Garity 2012.

to acquire skills and work on sustainable agricultural practices. Also, points of payment for social protection
benefits could be used to distribute information and equipment to promote more sustainable use of
natural resources or training towards environmental capacity-building activities. Cash transfers are already
being used in a number of countries as points of entry for complementary intervention to achieve related
outcomes—called “cash plus” interventions. For example, countries like Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso combine
cash transfers with participation in awareness seminars on nutrition, family health practices and sanitation.
In Ethiopia, Cameroon and Malawi, cash transfers are combined with participation in awareness seminars
on productive practices. Similarly, pre-established cash transfers can be supplemented by innovative
interventions to promote environmental sustainability.
3. Bringing the local dimension to the forefront
Sustainable natural resource management efforts build on local knowledge and experiences. UNDP has been
strongly involved in promoting a community-based approach to sustainable natural resource management
that builds on the deep knowledge developed by local communities about the natural resources they depend
on, as well as their essential roles in planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluating solutions.
Underlying the community-based model is the notion that communities are central to planning efforts that
aim to improve their lives. One example of such an approach is community-based adaptation, which operates
in communities that are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. It identifies, assists, and implements
community-based development activities that strengthen the capacity of local people to adapt to living in a
riskier and less predictable climate. Community-based adaptation generates adaptation strategies through
participatory processes, involving local stakeholders as well as development and disaster risk–reduction
practitioners. It builds on existing cultural norms and addresses local development concerns that make
people vulnerable to the impacts of climate change in the first place.89
Similar local level involvement and participatory processes can strengthen the effectiveness of social protection
implementation. As is the case in community-based adaptation projects, local level participation could provide
a way to understand local circumstances, needs and deprivations, and offer opportunities and innovations for
tailoring programmes, delivery and outputs to the local context. Since poverty is often the result of intersecting
circumstances and deprivations, local level inputs and participation can shed light on the local drivers of poverty
and how to overcome poverty, enhancing both the social and environmental impacts of programmes.
Local level processes can foster innovation in the adoption of ways of addressing local priorities, as can be
observed in community-based adaptation projects. In Bangladesh, for example, the Forest, Fish and Fruit (or
Triple F) model, implemented by the Government in partnership with UNDP to reduce vulnerability to climate
change in five coastal communities, offers a new way to transform barren coastal land into productive land. By
building mounds and ditches, fruit and timber trees can be grown to be protective and productive, and fish
can be cultivated within the ditches. In addition, high yielding vegetables can also be grown between the trees
and along the banks of the ditches. Thus the Triple F model not only provides protection against floods, but also
provides additional sources of income to the communities. This project adopted an innovative participatory
approach and a simple implementation arrangement. After assessing the vulnerability of the communities,
which were often hit by floods, the project worked with the community to develop adaptation solutions
deemed appropriate and effective. What started off as a pilot project in 2009, has grown to benefit 14,350
households in four vulnerable districts who are able to use the FFF model and complementary adaptation
measures (such as improved varieties of agricultural crops and livestock) to cultivate fruit and vegetables,
grow timber trees and rear fish, and ultimately manage and protect their natural capital in a changing climate.

89

Ayers and Forsyth 2009.

61

In the context of social protection, local participation can be especially suited for the identification of the
types of activities to be conducted under public works programmes. This is the case of MGNREGS, in India,
the massive rural development programme that benefits one in every five rural households in the country by
guaranteeing one hundred days of waged employment per year to rural households whose adult members
volunteer to do unskilled manual work. Under MGNREGS the list of “permissible” works is selected at the local
level and includes environmental services such as conservation of water, groundwater recharge, reduced soil
erosion, increased soil fertility, conservation of biodiversity, reclamation of degraded crop and grazing lands,
enhanced supply of leaf manure, fuel wood and non-wood forest products among others. An assessment
conducted by UNDP of the environmental implications of rural development schemes in India,90 finds that the
works under MGNREGS that are linked to water, soil and land, have resulted in higher crop productivity and
production, reduced potential damage due to extreme weather events, the regeneration of degraded soil,
land, and water resources, reduced soil erosion, improved soil fertility, increasing biodiversity, augmentation
of surface and ground water resources for irrigation and household use and increasing carbon sequestration.91
The assessment also finds that the environmental impact of MGNREGS could be potentiated by preparing a
perspective plan for every local unit, Gram Panchayat, incorporating landscape and watershed based planning,
and by strengthening the capacities of Gram Panchayats to develop green proposals and monitor green results.92
In the case of CCTs, local discretion can help identify locally appropriate conditionalities, environmental or
social, to enhance the development impacts of the programme. Conditionalities would be based on local
priorities as well as supply-side constraints, such as the availability of school and health infrastructure and
professionals, seeds, or local capacity to deliver and monitor.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

62

A community focus can also provide a more appropriate unit to identify complementary interventions to
improve the well-being of communities. For example, a UNDP led project in Niger, funded by the Global
Environment Facility (GEF), which aims to address adaptation in the agricultural sector in eight vulnerable
communities, combines adaptation efforts with other income generation programmes to build resilience. The
interventions include the implementation of adaptation practices at community level to enhance agricultural
activities, as well as supporting extra-agricultural productive activities in rural areas. These activities enable
poor households and those particularly vulnerable to climate change to earn sufficient income to offset the
risks to their agricultural systems from climate change. The project also improves the provision of financial
services (micro-finance) to poor and particularly vulnerable households to climate change, by financing
1,000 climate-adaptive income-generating micro-projects in the areas of agriculture, fisheries and pastoral
activities. Such credits benefit nearly 200,000 people of which 80 per cent are women, and improve their
income by over 10 per cent. The combination of these activities responds to the needs and priorities of the
local communities in an integrated manner.

6.2

Social protection and climate risk

Climate change is increasingly a source of vulnerability and risk for people around the world, as it increases
the incidence and intensity of natural hazards. Natural disasters affect more than 200 million people a year.93
In the last 20 years the impacts of disaster have affected 4.4 billion people, with 1.3 million lives lost, and over
US$2 trillion of economic losses.94 This includes large scale disasters, such as the Haiti Earthquake in 2010 and
the West Africa Ebola Outbreak in 2014, as well as smaller local disasters.

90
91
92
93
94

UNDP India 2012.
Sharma 2010.
UNDP India 2012.
Barder, Owen, 2015. “On World Humanitarian Day: Can we do Better with Cash?”. ODI Blog
UDP, UNICEF, OXFAM and GFDRR, 2014. “Disaster Risk Reduction makes Development Sustainable.”

63

“Disaster risk reduction and

building of resilience to disasters
to be addressed with a renewed
sense of urgency in the context

of sustainable development and
poverty eradication, and, as

appropriate, to be integrated into
policies, plans, programmes, and

budgets at all levels and considered

within relevant future frameworks.”
UN General Assembly Resolution on
Sustainable Development

95

Natural disasters have differing impacts on people and communities.
Poor families often live in insecure, disaster prone areas, in poorly
built housing, and depend on natural resources for their livelihoods.
The poor also have a lower capacity to recover when hit by a climate
related shock, since they have little or no access to savings or other
consumption smoothing mechanisms. Thus, they are often forced
to sell the few assets they own, or disinvest in education or health,
compromising their future livelihoods. Climate risks may also lead
to high and volatile food and commodity prices, due to temporary
disruptions of supply chains, infrastructure and/or transportation,
hitting the poor, who spend a large proportion of their income on
food, the hardest.
Social protection can be leveraged as an important mechanism to
buffer some of these effects by improving the adaptive capacity95 of
individuals, strengthening their ability to manage risk, cope with the
consequences of natural hazards when they happen, and eventually
reduce risk. Below is a visual representation of the linkages between
social protection and climate risk.

Adaptive Capacity refers to the ability of a system to adjust to climate change (including climate variability and extremes), to
moderate potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the consequences. McCarthy and others 2001.

figure 6.1 linkages between social protection and climate change

ADAPTIVE
CAPACITY

NGT
HEN
S

live Risk
lih red
oo u
d p ctio
ro n
div moti throu
ers o n gh
ific and
ati
STR
on
E

h
ug
hro cts
n t pa
ctio o im
du re t
NS
k re su
Ris expo
AKE
s
WE
les

WEAKENS

SOCIAL
PROTECTION

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

64

Loss of human and physical
assets and livelihoods
Improved risk management
and coping mechanisms

CLIMATE
RISK

WEAKENS
Risk-informed social protection: defined as social protection that has risk reduction as one of its key
objectives and that considers risk in its design and implementation)—can optimize scarce resources, and
prevent reversal on both social and natural capital due to changing environment.
The relationship between social protection and disaster risk reduction policies is still nascent, and legal and
institutional frameworks do not sufficiently integrate both objectives into policies or programmes. As a result,
linkages between social protection and risk management often appear incidental, and synergies are not
being built to their maximum potential.
Nevertheless, there is significant interest in countries around the world in making social protection more
disaster and climate risk-sensitive. There is also a growing recognition of the importance of bridging the gap
between humanitarian response and social protection. As a contribution to the “World Humanitarian Summit”
in 2016, the Social Protection Interagency Cooperation Board96 submitted a statement on the need to bridge
the development-humanitarian divide. It stressed that “social protection can contribute to build capacity at
individual, household, community and national level to effectively withstand the negative impacts of shocks
while contributing to promote sustainable management of resources.”97
Below, we review a number of instruments and examples of programmes that are successfully tackling both climate
risk and human well-being. The actual choice of instruments or set of instruments is highly contextual, depending on
social protection systems already in place in the country, on risk levels, as well as on capacity and resources available for
implementation. However, a set of key lessons extracted from these experiences is included at the end of the section.

96
97

Of which UNDP is a partner, together with more than 20 international organizations and development partners
“Leaving no one behind” n.d.

Cash transfers as disaster response and resilience building instruments: As a disaster response
mechanism, the scaling up of existing cash transfer programmes that had some flexibility built into them has
proven to be an effective way to provide immediate relief to those affected. For example, after Typhoon Haiyan
in the Philippines, the Government immediately doubled the amount distributed to registered beneficiaries
of its conditional cash transfer programme (Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program - 4Ps) in typhoon affected
areas. Through an emergency cash transfer top-up the Government, in collaboration with development
actors, provided additional payments for some 100,000 recipients through almost 200,000 payments. These
payments were delivered via the 4Ps cash card and over-the-counter, where the cash card was not feasible.
Given the success of this response, the Government passed a resolution to provide a “Guiding framework for
the adoption of Cash Transfer Programming in addressing emergency and early recovery needs”, which allows
flexibility to expand the programmes to be able to respond to crises.
Cash transfers can also be used to provide incentives for specific relevant behaviours, such as debris clearing,
house reconstruction and savings. In the case of the Philippines, as a complement to the emergency cash
transfer top-up, UNDP implemented a large-scale cash grant project conditional on 15 days of debris clearing
work; 45,000 received grants to cover their basic needs through these cash grant schemes. Similarly, in
the aftermath of Haiti’s earthquake in 2010, UNDP partnered with the Government of Haiti, to deliver cash
instalments targeted to household reconstruction through a mobile money transfer mechanism. More than
2,000 mobile money transfers were delivered in a three month period to 1,000 low-income families receiving
subsidies totalling US$500 to purchase construction materials such as cement, iron and wood at selected
project-certified stores for high-quality assurance at affordable prices. The initiative is part of the Community
Support Centres for House Repairs. Distributing the cash through mobile mechanisms helped boost financial
inclusion in Haiti, where nearly two-thirds of the population has access to mobile phones but only 10 per cent
have bank accounts. The beneficiaries gained access via mobile phone checking accounts, a safe and cheap
method of storing cash that also reduces financial transaction costs, improves users’ ability to save and helps
bring more people into the formal financial sector.
Public Works programmes are another instrument that can contribute to several development objectives
and play an important role in reducing and mitigating the risk of climate change. Short term public works,
implemented immediately after crises, can provide cash income to affected people while taking care of
the immediate needs of communities, such as rubble removal, restoration of rural roads, and restoration of
basic services infrastructure such as schools and health facilities. Longer term public works, that focus on
disaster preparedness and climate change adaptation practices such as soil conservation, water harvesting,
afforestation and sustainable agricultural techniques, can protect the livelihoods of millions, enhancing their
resilience to the adverse effects of climate change.
In particular where risk reduction as a priority is reflected in the type of projects that are selected to be
carried out, public work programmes have been successful at generating environmentally sound public
goods that increase the resilience of the communities. Land management practices are labour intensive and
must be adapted to local realities and require the participation of local communities to be effective. Public
works interventions are an appropriate tool in both emergency and rehabilitation/development contexts to
implement these practices. Planting trees, digging planting pits, building earth embankments and other water
and soil conservation practices can be implemented on a large scale through public works interventions.
Ethiopia’s PSNP is good example of a risk-informed public works programme. Initially developed as an
instrument to support food insecure households and address some of the drivers of food insecurity, the
PSNP is a combination of cash transfer and public works programmes, providing cash to those households in
exchange for working in public works programmes, as well as unconditional cash to those unable to work. The
PSNP adopted an integrated approach to watershed planning that aims to reverse the severe environmental
degradation and raise the agricultural incomes of the poor. The project selection within the programme is
actually done through the Government’s Community‐based Participatory Watershed Management Planning

65

process, and focused mostly on soil and
water conservation activities. Some of
the types of projects executed under the
PSNP include soil and stone embankment
construction, pond construction and
maintenance, spring and well construction,
land rehabilitation through area enclosure,
small-scale irrigation canals, and tree
nursery site establishment.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

66

The programme also prioritizes investments
that have been locally identified, giving
people a sense of ownership of community
assets, promoting better use and
maintenance of these assets, and increasing
local institutional capacity. The works have
brought demonstrable benefits to the
communities in the form of environmental
transformation. For example, improved
water conservation has led to increased
agricultural productivity and an increase in
groundwater recharge so that dry springs
have started to flow again. In addition,
the communities have enhanced income
generation from area closure, and improved
access to markets, education and health
facilities.98 An assessment of the programme
after the 2008 drought found that in most
instances households receiving PSNP
transfers were better able to withstand
shocks—including drought, flood, illness,
loss of livestock or loss of crops—than those
not receiving the transfer.
Index-based insurance is another social
protection mechanism that can help
manage climate-related risks. In places
where conventional insurance is inaccessible
and unlikely to work due to high transaction
costs and incentive problems (moral hazard
and adverse selection), index- based
insurance mechanisms provide a viable
alternative. Payments are triggered by an
easily measurable event such as rainfall
below a certain level, the occurrence of frost,
or temperatures above a certain threshold,
thus there is no need to verify damage and
pay outs can be speedily distributed. Low

98

Grosh and others 2008.

Weather Index-Based Insurance in
the Philippines
UNDP and the Government of the Philippines through
the Philippine Crop Insurance Corporation (PCIC) are
co-implementing a project in the Mindanao region
called Weather Index-Based Insurance (WIBI) Mindanao.
The project aims to reduce poverty by strengthening
the resilience of agriculture-based rural communities
in Mindanao through an insurance mechanism and
productivity enhancement measures. To ensure the
cohesive and holistic delivery of project results to the
targeted 2,000 farming households, WIBI Mindanao
works on three components.
The first component is focused on policy advocacy and
knowledge to adjust regulatory incentive structures
to stimulate private sector engagement in climate risk
transfer mechanisms. It seeks to create an enabling
environment for WIBI by influencing relevant credit and
financing policies to accelerate the scaling up process
and implementation.
The second component primarily works on customizing
and applying the weather index-based integrated
financial package to strengthen the resilience of target
beneficiary communities. To date, WIBI policies have
been distributed to 837 clients, both self-financed and
borrowing farmers. Access to WIBI enables farmers
to restore livelihoods through immediate pay outs
following the occurrence of extreme weather events
and climate shocks. WIBI offers two different forms
of cover to major insurable grain crops like rice. One
against low rainfall and another against excess rainfall.
Finally, through community-based adaptation learning
and measures, the project aims to build the capacities
of farmers and producer organizations to analyse
climate risk and develop and implement adaptation
practices that enhance agricultural productivity. This is
currently being carried out through various trainings on
disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation
strategies, good agricultural practices and climate
resilient field schools.
Source: WIDI Mindanao Project 2016.

verification and administrative costs make it possible to offer these insurance mechanisms to small scale farmers,
for whom conventional commercial insurance are too costly to be accessible. The speed of pay outs for the
impact of erratic weather patterns improves the resilience of subscribing farmers who are able to react rapidly to
resume agricultural activities, sometimes even within the same cropping season, after an adverse event. Some
schemes, concerned with reaching the poorest farmers, allow them to pay for insurance through labour.

67
One example of index-based insurance is from the Philippines. In 2015, the government of the Philippines, in
collaboration with UNDP, began a project to afford weather index-based insurance to farmers in the Mindanao
region to reduce the financial costs of extreme weather events to poor farmers and to increase investment in
agriculture.
Similarly, in Ethiopia crop insurance is one of the coping strategies that UNDP is helping to introduce in order
to reduce the vulnerability of smallholder farmers who are increasingly dependent on unpredictable rainfall
and crop failure. Insurance pay outs are determined according to an established threshold value for rainfall.
Around 12,000 smallholder farmers benefit from Ethiopia’s weather index insurance claims payment to cover
loss for crop failure loss due to El Niño in 2015. This initiative is a collaboration between UNDP/GEF, the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and two local insurance firms.99
Although it is a relatively new instrument, there is mounting evidence of the positive impact of index-based
insurance on mitigating the effects of climate change. A study of index-based livestock insurance established
in 2010 in Kenya finds that participating households that received pay outs after the 2011 drought, were 36
per cent less likely to distress sell their livestock, and 25 per cent less likely to reduce meals, than uninsured
households.100 The mechanism also seems to have a positive impact even in the absence of a pay out,
according to surveys of subjective well-being in Ethiopia, after insurance was purchased. Another assessment
of index-based insurance in Ethiopia shows that insured farmers save more than twice than those without any
insurance, and they invest more in seeds, fertilizer and productive assets, such as plough oxen. Women, who
often head the poorest households, achieved the largest gains in productivity, through investing in labour
and improved tools for planting.101

99 UNDP 2015c.
100 Barret 2014.
101 Oxfam America 2013.

One important prerequisite for the viability
of index-based insurance programmes
is the availability of high quality, reliable,
timely, long-term data to calculate the
premium and to determine pay outs.
This can be addressed with satellite data,
early warning systems or weather station
data. Also establishing informed effective
demand is critical, especially among clients
with little experience with any insurance,
much less a complex index-based insurance
product. To build demand for index-based
insurance in Kenya, simulation games
with real information and incentives were
conducted among potential buyers. Finally,
it is important to consider the design or
availability of a low cost delivery mechanism
for making insurance available for numerous
small and medium scale producers. Mobile
payments and ICT innovations can be used
for this purpose if available.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

68

A few general recommendations can
be distilled from the above examples of
instruments used around the world that
combine social protection and climate risk
reduction objectives. These include:
1.

Widening targeting criteria to include vulnerable populations: Broadening targeting approaches to consider
vulnerability to multiple stresses, including climatic ones, can allow the social
protection programmes to build resilience among those that need it most, as
well as reach vulnerable groups affected
by disasters rapidly and efficiently. To
do this it is necessary to look at environmental circumstances and risks as part of
the beneficiary selection criteria. It is also
critical to include within beneficiary databases, those that might not be income
poor, but are vulnerable to shocks, either
because of their geographic location or
occupation, or with a high propensity of
falling into poverty when shocks occur.
This is exactly what the Dominican Republic is doing through its single registry
of beneficiaries, as described in the box
below.

Risk-Informed Conditional Cash
Transfers in the Dominican Republic
The Dominican Republic, in close collaboration with
UNDP and other development partners, is undertaking
innovative efforts to coordinate their Conditional
Cash Transfer programme with disaster risk reduction
measures to protect vulnerable households in the
event of climate shocks.
As a first step in this process, the government is generating
a set of mechanisms to help identify those most
vulnerable to climate risks. These include the addition of
environmental variables to the information captured by
the single registry of beneficiaries for social programmes,
known as SIUBEN (Sistema Unico de Beneficiarios), which
help identify the geographic areas that are vulnerable and
recurrently exposed to climatic shocks. This information will
be complemented by information collected through the
questionnaire used to identify poor households which will
now include five questions related to environmental risks.
Additionally, the country is in the process of developing of
a Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) which combines
both material well-being and environmental variables.
The results from the supplementary variables included
in the SIUBEN, additional questions of identification
questionnaires, and the revamped MPI will serve as the
basis for the development of an index of environmental
vulnerability (IVAM), and an index of vulnerability to
climate shocks (IVACC). The aim is that both these
indexes will be incorporated as criteria for eligibility into
the conditional cash transfer programme. Ultimately,
this will ensure that when vulnerable households are
faced by a climatic shock, they can easily be reached
through the CCT mechanisms, and provided with
adequate benefits to prevent them from engaging
into negative coping strategies that result in losses of
human capital investments.

69
2.

A focus on building livelihoods and assets that strengthen community and individual resilience to
climate change. A focus on adaptation and mitigation practices in the design of programmes, including
the selection of projects in public works programmes, training programmes in cash plus schemes, or
climate related insurance policies. For example, in disaster prone areas programmes that build physical
infrastructure could prioritize infrastructure that increases community preparedness. Or livelihood
programmes could focus on improving skills related to disaster response or risk mitigation. Cash transfers
and public works programmes need to be delivered as part of, or in combination with, a longer term
development oriented programme of work that aims to strengthen and protect assets and livelihoods,
decrease vulnerability, build resilience and develop the institutional structures and systems to enable
sustainable growth.

3.

Align social protection information systems with climate related information such as early warning systems and risk mapping. Allowing feedback loops with early warning systems and coordination
with agencies responsible for weather tracking can provide an indication of when to activate benefits in
a particular area or to a specific population.

4.

Building an inherent flexibility within programmes, to allow for easy integration of beneficiaries that
are affected both by recurrent events, and by one-off disasters. Experience from a number of countries
where flexible social protection instruments were already in place on a large scale when shocks occurred,
demonstrate that they can be efficient in reaching very large numbers of vulnerable households and
communities through relatively minor adaptations of targeting criteria and timeframes, often with
comparatively low additional costs.102

102 UNISDR 2011.

FUNDING AND
RAISING RESOURCES
FOR SOCIAL
PROTECTION
Social protection is an investment in
people, with a multiplier effect that
promotes sustainable development,
inclusive economic growth, job creation,
and social inclusion.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

70

7

7.1

Is social protection affordable?

It is critical to understand social protection as an investment in people, with a multiplier effect that promotes
sustainable development, inclusive economic growth, job creation, and social inclusion. In this context,
affordability can be assessed based on long-term benefits.
Implementing social protection policies entails start-up costs and recurrent costs. Estimation of the costs
of different schemes is normally done at the time of the Assessment-Based National Dialogue (ABND). The
affordability of social protection benefits and administration is well established in the literature. Several
recent studies suggest that social protection packages that extend income security and scale up essential
health services are affordable even in the poorest countries.103 ILO costing studies on a basic package of social
protection for a selected set of low- and low-middle-income countries in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia show
that a cash benefit package, including old age, disability pensions and family allowances, but excluding health
care, would cost between 2.2 per cent and 5.7 per cent of GDP.104 The annual cost of the Productive Safety Net
Programme (PSNP) in Ethiopia, which covers 8.2 million people, is equivalent to 1.2 per cent of GDP. Safety net
coverage in Kenya, which provides benefits to around 3 million people, is equivalent to 0.8 per cent of GDP.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

72

Moreover, evidence shows that every dollar invested in social protection can generate much larger pay offs
when increases in productivity, prevention of illnesses, and days of school attendance are taken into account.
One study found that in very poor countries, each dollar spent on nutrition interventions for children has at least
a US$30 payoff.105 In the United States of America, it is estimated that every dollar invested in early childhood
interventions saves taxpayers US$13 in the future. Analysis of the impact of cash transfers on HIV outcomes
provides evidence that the value of averted HIV infections far outweighs the cost of the programmes.106
Many countries have shown a significant commitment to social protection and have assigned a percentage
of the national budget to social protection programming. Brazil is well known for its commitment over the
last 12 years to Bolsa Familia and more recently to Brasil sem Miseria. Similarly, the government of Bangladesh
has shown clear commitment to social protection. In its budget for 2012-2013, it allocated 5.7 per cent of the
national (non-development) budget and 4.5 per cent of development budget for social security purposes.

7.2

Financing mechanisms

Financing mechanisms for social protection are often included as part of national social protection strategies.
This is of particular importance because, despite growing levels of political support and demand for social
protection, funding remains a very important challenge for many countries. This is particularly the case in
least developed countries, fragile states, highly indebted countries, where resources are limited. Small Island
Developing States (SIDS) also present significant challenges due to structural characteristics, such as very
small populations widely disbursed over multiple islands a long distance from each other. This makes the per
capita cost of service provision in these countries much higher than in other countries.
The financial sustainability of social protection requires the commitment of domestic financing at least to cover the
recurrent costs of social protection (i.e. the cost of the benefit and administration), and therefore to create or secure
fiscal space for social protection. Fiscal space essentially is the budgetary room governments have to increase
expenditures to finance a certain project or policy. Fiscal space is determined by the balance between government
revenues and expenditures. In order to create or increase fiscal space for social protection a government can either:

103
104
105
106

ILO 2011.
ILO 2008.
Hoddinott, Rosegrant, and Torero 2012.
Remme and others 2014.

(i) reprioritize pubic spending (i.e. from military expenditure, underperforming programmes, or distortive
general subsidies to social protection);
(ii) increase tax revenues, notably through tax reforms and enforcement (i.e. income taxes, corporate taxes
and taxes to the financial sector, natural resources extraction taxes, import/export tariffs, ‘green’ taxes,
tourism taxes, and other taxes; consumption/sales taxes are not advised as they are generally regressive);
(iii) expand social security coverage and contributory revenues;
(iv) eliminate illicit financial flows;
(v) use fiscal and foreign exchange reserves, some countries even use stabilization funds or other sovereign
wealth funds.107
It is often argued that social protection is not affordable or that government expenditure cuts are inevitable
during adjustment periods. But there are alternatives, even in the poorest countries. The seven financing
options above are supported by policy statements of the United Nations and international financial
institutions. Many governments around the world have been applying them for decades, showing that there
a wide variety of revenue choices and demonstrating the creativity to address vital social investment gaps.
Each country is unique, and all options should be carefully examined, including the potential risks and tradeoffs, and considered in national dialogue.
According to the ILO, between 2010 and 2015, more than 100 governments have considered removing
food and fuel subsidies and replacing them with programmes targeted on the poor.108 Indonesia recently
eliminated fuel subsidies and used the resources to finance newly introduced universal health coverage. The
Philippines introduced taxes on tobacco and alcohol to expand the scope of its universal health coverage and
reduce health expenditures due to mortality and morbidity associated with tobacco and alcohol consumption.
Thailand issued licences to access generic versions of medicines, which led to substantial price reductions,
enabling the Government to provide treatment to more than 84,000 people.
Allocating funds raised from taxes to mineral and natural resource extraction is another way of financing social
development. Mongolia, for example, finances a universal child grant, the Mongolian Child Money Programme
(CMP), from windfall taxes on mining profits. Other countries have created emergency stabilization funds
from taxes on extractive sectors, to use in time of shocks. This ensures that investments in social and economic
development remain constant. Examples include Chile’s Copper Stabilization Fund, Iran’s Oil Stabilization Fund
and Timor-Leste’s Petroleum Fund. During the 2008 economic downturn, a number of countries drew on these
funds to finance stimulus measures for national growth and increase social protection.109
Other innovative ways to raise funding for development are being explored for financing the SDGs. Some of
these might be appropriate for financing social protection, including an international solidarity levy on air
tickets, debt conversions (e.g. Debt2Health, debt-for-environment and debt-for-education swaps), voluntary
solidarity contributions (e.g. Product (RED), the Digital Solidarity Levy), weather- and commodity-related
insurance, counter-cyclical lending, climate adaptation funding, emissions trading, and curtailing illicit
outflows of capital, among others.110

107
108
109
110

Ortiz, Cummins and Karunanethy 2015.
ILO 2014.
ILO 2014.
UNDP 2012.

73

Some countries have been quite successful
in scaling up social protection programmes.
The Government of Zambia, for example, has
been able to scale up the budget allocation
to social protection by 133 per cent between
2010 and 2016. The allocation for its cash
transfer programme has increased by 67 per
cent between 2015 and 2016, and more than
seven-fold over six years.111

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

74

There is also a critical role for donors in
supporting countries to cover the start-up
costs of inclusive and systemic social protection
that moves them closer to sustainable
development. It is important to consider where
donor money will be more efficient and have
higher impact. Ultimately, social protection
programmes need to be governmentowned and the recurrent costs (benefits and
administrative costs) of social protection must
be covered by national resources. Thus donors
and governments must collaborate in line
with the countries’ development objectives.
In recent decades, a large amount of donor
funding towards social protections has gone
towards financing pilots and demonstration
projects that fail to become governmentowned projects. This shows the importance of
identifying national resources from the onset
of piloting social protection and of producing
sound costing and/or actuarial studies to
ensure the sustainability of social protection
systems. Donor funding might have a more
significant impact if it is used in the context
of government-driven programmes, working
with policymakers to monitor, evaluate,
improve and scale them. Additionally, outside
funding can be critical to establish and facilitate
coordination mechanisms among government
ministries, civil society and international and
bilateral donors.

111 UNICEF 2016.

Rwanda’s Vision 2020 Umurenge
Programme
The Vision 2020 Umurenge Programme (VUP) in
Rwanda is a good example of nationally owned
social protection that has successfully garnered the
international community’s backing. The VUP is a
flagship programme to accelerate the reduction of
extreme poverty. It has three core components: a public
works programme called the Ubudehe (traditional
practices and cultural activities of collective action
to solve community problems); a credit scheme; and
direct support to those unable to participate in the
public works. The initiative builds on past experiences
where isolated interventions by sector ministries,
donors or NGOs were unsuccessful in lifting people
out of extreme poverty. The VUP balances central
guidelines for socioeconomic transformation (i.e.
economic growth, job creation and extreme poverty
eradication) with local participatory mechanisms.
This intends to make the best possible use of scare
resources while ensuring adequate local incentives
for sustainable progress. The programme is rooted
in the national development strategy with strong
support from the central government, combined with
a highly decentralized administrative structure and an
innovative community-based targeting system. The
programme has led donors to align themselves with
government priorities and positions, avoiding pilot
programmes or fragmentation.
Source: UNDP 2015d.

ANNEX 1. LETTER FROM UNDG CHAIR AND ILO DIRECTOR
GENERAL TO ALL UN RESIDENT CO-ORDINATORS AND UN
COUNTRY TEAMS

75

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners
76

ANNEX 2. GLOSSARY
Adaptive social protection

A series of measures which aims to build resilience of the poorest and most
vulnerable people to climate change, and integrates social protection with
Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change adaptation.

Assessment-based national
dialogue

The assessment-based national dialogue (ABND) exercise is a methodology
that was developed by several UN agencies and is being applied in 35
countries across the world. It is a process of national dialogue involving
governments, employers, workers, civil society and development partners.
The process helps to define a Social Protection Floor (SPF) and advocate for its
national endorsement and ownership. As the SPF is cross-cutting in nature, the
ABND requires active participation as One UN, according to the strengths and
mandates of different agencies.
The ABND consists of three steps. First, the tool reviews the social protection
schemes in a country, identifies the gaps and challenges, and makes
recommendations to address them. The recommendations are designed to
address the existing gaps and challenges and establish an SPF. Second, the
cost of the recommendations or the cost of completing the SPF over the next
few years is estimated. Third, the recommendations are presented to the
government for their endorsement and further action.
The strength of the ABND lies in the fact that it is based on a continuous and
sustained national dialogue process. The recommendations are an outcome
of the dialogue process (and in some countries, a consensus between
participating agencies) and are therefore more acceptable to governments.
Link to ABND guide:
www.social-protection.org/gimi/gess/ShowRessource.action?ressource.
ressourceId=53462

Associated Integrated
Management Information
System (IMIS)

See “single registry”

Basic social services

Basic social services consist of basic education, primary health care, nutrition,
safe water and sanitation

Cash-for-work

The use of cash payments as an aid instrument and alternative or complement
to in-kind forms of assistance, such as food aid.

Climate change adaptation
(CCA)

Adaptation refers to adjustments in ecological, social, or economic systems in
response to actual or expected climatic stimuli and their effects or impacts. It
refers to changes in processes, practices, and structures to moderate potential
damages or to benefit from opportunities associated with climate change.

Climate responsive social
protection

Social protection mechanisms that are adapted to be risk-informed, improve
resilience and protect vulnerable people from the risks of a changing
environment. Conditional transfers, temporary employment programmes and
micro insurance schemes are examples of such widespread instruments that
have an important resilience-building component.

77

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

78

Climate-smart social
protection

Social protection that adheres to the principle “do no harm.” Social and
environmental opportunities and risks are addressed in an integrated manner,
recognizing the interrelatedness of social and environmental issues. Beyond
understanding the potential social impact of social protection, proposals are
reviewed for potential environmental risks to ensure that potential adverse
impacts are assessed and avoided, or where avoidance is not possible,
minimized, mitigated, and managed.

Community resilience

The capacity of a system, community or society potentially exposed to hazards
to adapt, by resisting or changing in order to reach and maintain an acceptable
level of functioning and structure.

Community-based
adaptation projects

Adaptation projects that seek to enhance the resiliency of communities, and/
or the ecosystems on which they rely, to climate change.

Community-based social
protection

An informal grouping of activities that protect community members from risk
through “locally arranged social protection measures that are predicated on
people’s cultural beliefs, norms and values.”

Community-based
targeting

Community-based targeting uses established community groups to identify
the beneficiaries of a specific programme within their communities.

Conditional cash transfer
(CCT)

Programmes that give money to poor people in return for fulfilling specific
behavioural conditions. These conditions include for example children’s school
attendance.

Consumption smoothing

The ways in which people or households optimize their lifetime standard
of living by ensuring a proper balance of spending and saving during the
different phases of their life.

Contribution schemes

Schemes where beneficiaries make regular payments to a scheme that will
cover costs in the future, for example, maternity, unemployment or illness.
Sometimes costs are matched or subsidized by the scheme provider, which
can be the government or a private entity.

Country Diagnostic
Instrument (CODI)

An instrument developed by the Social Protection Interagency Coordination
Board that provides guidance for the collection of information and
performance assessment of social protection programmes and systems.
The CODI can be used to assess the social protection system and a selected
number of schemes in a country, often the major schemes or the ones with
high coverage. The tool also measures their performance against a set of
benchmarks. It provides a snapshot of the social protection situation in the
country. The strength of the CODI lies in its detailed and systematic assessment
of schemes. Link to CODI tool: http://ispatools.org/core-diagnosticinstrument/

Debt conversions

The exchange of debt)—typically at a substantial discount)— for equity, or
counterpart domestic currency funds to be used to finance a particular project
or policy. Debt for equity, debt for nature and debt for development swaps are
all examples of debt conversion.

Developmental graduation

An approach providing integrated services to improve opportunities and
capabilities across the lifecycle. It focuses more on exiting deprivations than on
exiting specific programmes.

Diaspora bonds

A retail savings instrument marketed to diaspora members. A developing
country government (or a reputable private corporation in a developing
country) can tap into the wealth of relatively poor (but financially aware)
migrants by selling such bonds in small denominations (from US$100 to
US$1,000).

Disaster risk reduction
(DRR)

The concept and practice of systematic efforts to analyse and reduce the causal
factors of disasters. Reducing exposure to hazards, lessening vulnerability of
people and property, wise management of land and the environment, and
improving preparedness and early warning for adverse events are all examples
of disaster risk reduction.

Duty bearers

Actors who have a particular obligation or responsibility to respect, promote
and realize human rights and to abstain from human rights violations. The
term is most commonly used to refer to state actors, but non-state actors can
also be considered duty bearers.

Endogenous graduation

Graduation or exit from a social security scheme after a change in the
beneficiary’s condition related to the objective of the scheme. For example,
end of a scholarship after graduation.

Exogenous graduation

Graduation or exit from a social security scheme based on a change in the
circumstances of the beneficiaries not related to objective of the scheme. p. 38.

Extreme poor

Individuals living below the international poverty line of US$1.90 a day.

Graduation model

A model providing a sequenced and intensive package of support to the very
poor, or the ultra-poor. The main objective is to “graduate” the beneficiaries to
productive livelihoods.

Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative, HIPC

International response to provide comprehensive debt relief to the world’s
poorest, most heavily indebted countries. The HIPC Initiative was launched by
the World Bank and the IMF in 1996.

Inclusive social protection

Social protection that goes beyond income redistribution to include the type
of reforms that tackle social exclusion, such as legal and policy reforms to
change disempowering and discriminatory social norms and practices and to
create an enabling social environment that would enable and encourage the
most marginalized to register, access, and benefit from social protection.

Index-based insurance
mechanisms

Insurance where pay-outs are based on an objectively measured index, such as
weather.

Informal social protection

Community based informal safety nets, such as remittances from relatives
living abroad, borrowing between family/community members, work
reciprocity and gift exchanges.

Life-cycle approach/
continuum of protection

Social protection based on a continuum of protection, available at different
stages in the life of individuals, including transitions from one stage to the
next.

Means testing

Collecting information on the income or assets of individuals or households.

Multidimensional poverty

Multidimensional poverty is made up of several factors that constitute poor
people’s experience of deprivation)—such as poor health, lack of education,
inadequate living standards, lack of income (as one of several factors
considered), disempowerment, poor quality of work and threat from violence.

79

Multilateral
debt relief
initiative (MDRI)
Non-contributory social
insurance

A mechanism to extend pensions and health insurance to low-income workers
not covered by contributory systems, either because they work in the informal
sector or are self-employed.

Payment for environmental
services (PES)

Systems, established in many countries, providing incentives for individuals to
perform environmental services that can diminish the exposure to natural risks
of communities, and improve their coping mechanisms.

Poverty gap

The mean shortfall of the total population from the poverty line (counting the
non-poor as having zero shortfall), expressed as a percentage of the poverty
line. This measure reflects the depth of poverty as well as its incidence.

Poverty gap squared

The mean shortfall of the total population from the poverty line squared, thus
giving more emphasis to those that fall far behind, than those closest to the
poverty line.

Proportionate universalism

Resourcing and delivering of universal services at a scale and intensity
proportionate to the degree of need.

Proxy means testing

A testing mechanism using household characteristics that are easily
observable to determine the socio-economic status of the household.

Self-targeting mechanism

Self-targeting consists of providing incentives to encourage participation of
the target approach group, and non-participation of those outside the target
group.

Single registry

A beneficiary system, organized into a database, of all households and
individuals interviewed to be registered into social protection programmes.
The aim of a Single Registry is to collect, record and store updated and
historical information on individual and household characteristics and
circumstances, to determine their eligibility to certain programmes.

Single window service/
one-stop shop

Services consolidated so that families only need to approach a single office,
ideally at the subnational level, where they can access the information and
register for a number of services provided by the social protection system and
links to other sectors.

Social exclusion

Inadequate participation of individuals in key aspects of their society. The
forms of exclusion can be categorized into exclusion from income, exclusion
from services or exclusion from participation.

Social insurance

Contributory schemes that include a risk-pooling mechanism based on the
principle of solidarity. Usually, social insurance schemes guarantee protection
in the case of specific risks or contingencies, such as unemployment, sickness,
maternity, disability, employment injury or old age. In many cases, social
insurance schemes include non-contributory elements that allow for a more
equitable distribution of benefits, particularly for those with low incomes
and limited contributory capacity. This can include redistribution within the
schemes, or partial financing from the government budget (general taxation);
the latter type of schemes are also referred to as partially contributory
schemes. One caveat of contributory social insurance is that is strongly linked
to the formal labour market and exclude workers in informal employment, yet
many countries have made great strides to extend coverage to those workers

80

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

An Initiative that provided for 100 per cent relief on eligible debt from three
multilateral institutions to a group of low-income countries. The initiative,
aimed to help eligible countries advance toward the United Nations’
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), focused on halving poverty by 2015.

Social protection

A tool available to governments for protecting individuals from the
consequences and drivers of deprivation and social exclusion. On a more
operational level, social protection systems provide contributory or noncontributory forms of income support that reduce and prevent poverty;
ensures access to basic social services to all, especially for groups that are
traditionally vulnerable or excluded; stimulates productive inclusion through
the development of capabilities, skills, rights and opportunities for the
poor and excluded; builds resilience and protects people against the risks
of livelihood shocks throughout their lifecycle; and helps remove structural
barriers, including barriers within the household, that prevent people
from achieving well-being. Social protection systems can include various
schemes and programmes, including universal schemes, social assistance,
social insurance, employment guarantees and other public employment
programmes, and measures to facilitate access to education, health and care
services.

Social protection floor

The minimum access to services and income security that needs to be
provided for all.

Social transfer

A benefit provided by the government or another actor to an individual (or
household) is considered to be in need of a specific type of social assistance.

Sustainable development

Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their own needs.

Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs)

A set of 17 Goals to end poverty, fight inequality and injustice, and tackle
climate change by 2030 agreed upon by world leaders on 25 September 2015.

Targeted programmes/
approach

Programmes directed to a specific group of people to fulfil a previously
identified need.

Targeting mechanism

The mechanism through which the household that will benefit from a
programme is targeted.

Transformative policies

Policies that remove structural barriers to the improvement of people’s wellbeing. These include legislation against discrimination, minimum wages, the
enforcement of the rights of children, etc.

Universality

A principle recognizing that the right to social protection is universal, and
it needs to be fulfilled by a social protection system that ensures universal
protection through adequate benefits and services, with an appropriate
allocation of resources.

Universal programmes /
approach

Universal programmes are those available to everyone who chooses to use
them.

Universal social protection
schemes

See “Universal programmes”.

81

ANNEX 3. TARGETING APPROACHES AND MECHANISMS
Targeting programmes requires definition of a targeting approach and a targeting mechanism. Currently, it is
very often concentrated on households even though it cannot be assumed that the benefits of targeting will
be equally shared within households. Some commonly used targeting approaches include:
Poverty: focuses on the income, expenditure, consumption, or assets of a household, rather than an individual,
or (more recently) a multi-dimensional poverty index.
Social category: focuses on whether a household or an individual belongs to a specific demographic group,
such as disadvantaged ethnic groups, people living with disabilities (or their care givers), LGTB, the homeless,
women headed households, etc.
Geographical location112: focuses on different regions, villages or districts with widespread poverty or
increased risk of droughts or floods.
Age: focuses on specific age groups, including infants, children, youth, working-age women and men, and
elderly women and men. Age brackets commonly used are: 0-5, 6-14, 15-24, 25-64 and above 65 years.
Risk level: focuses on populations that are prone to risks (including the risk of falling into poverty, the risk of
being affected by a changing environment, the risk of HIV, etc.), and the extent to which they have coping
mechanisms.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

82
The definition of the targeting approach is critical to ensure that social protection actually addresses the
economic, social and environmental pillars of sustainable development. Targeted policies often adopt the
poverty approach based on income, and neglect other forms of deprivation. Moreover, as noted, if targeted at
households, specific members of households may receive fewer benefits because of a lack of income pooling.
If not adequately targeted, such policies can actually increase inequality, and make certain groups worse off.
Using a nationally defined multidimensional poverty index is a step forward, but other dimensions must be
considered when targeting specific policies.
A targeting mechanism is the actual mechanism through which the household that will benefit from a
programme is targeted. It aims to reduce errors of under-coverage, where households within the targeting
approach are left out, and leakage errors, where ineligible households are included. Some commonly used
targeting mechanisms:
Community-based targeting uses established community groups to identify the beneficiaries of a specific
programme within their communities. The community groups can be locally elected officials or other
governing bodies, NGOs, religious groups, or any other group that is very well embedded in the community.
Community-based targeting is typically used where other administrative structures and data are weak or
non-existent. If implemented appropriately, it can be less expensive than other more data-driven means
of targeting. Households can also be identified quickly since community groups may already have better
information for identification of needs. There also might be less opportunity or incentive for households to
misrepresent their needs or their levels of income, assets or risks. Furthermore, local criteria or definitions of
deprivation may be more adaptable to local conditions and culture than rigid technical national formulas. Also,
community involvement at this level may potentially foster and strengthen social cohesion and community
organizations, with positive external effects. This may be especially true for disadvantaged groups who may

112 Geographical location can be both a targeting approach and a targeting mechanism.

be empowered to articulate and press demands. Community mobilization may be an end in itself, but may
also confer legitimacy that in turn helps build political support for targeted approaches.113 However, the
effectiveness and cost of this method strongly depends on the integrity of implementation and the risk of
political capture.
Self-targeting consists of providing incentives to encourage participation of the target approach group, and
non-participation of those outside the target group. In that sense, it is the household that decides whether or
not to participate in a programme. The incentives are designed in such a way that the cost of participation by
the non-targeted is higher than for those targeted. The household’s decision to participate or not is usually
influenced by the opportunity cost of participation, the quantity and quality of goods provided, and the stigma
that participating creates. The main advantage of self-targeting is the low cost it entails. However, there are
some ethical and social implications to such self-targeting mechanisms. For one, the quality of the service/
transfer provided has to be below a certain level where non-targeted households will opt out. Secondly, it can
have important stigmatizing effects, and effects on earning in the future.
Cash-for-work programmes very often use this approach, setting the daily wage at a level slightly below
the minimum wage, so that only those who are destitute or cannot find other employment benefit from
the programme. Households decide to participate based on whether they have the opportunity to work
somewhere else for a higher wage, the kind of work done, and whether participating means a loss of social
standing or stigma. It should be noted that one disadvantage of self-targeting cash-for-work programmes is
that since poor women are expected to perform unpaid care and domestic work cash, financial poverty may
be reduced but time poverty may be increased.
Some food subsidies or food programmes targeted at the poorest also use self-targeting mechanisms by
subsidizing only products that are more highly valued by the poorest. For example, a FAO study found that
yellow maize flour was not consumed by higher-income groups because it was deemed to be of inferior
quality than a more expensive alternative, white maize flour. The poor, however, did consume yellow maize
flour as a component of the basic basket of products. By subsidizing yellow maize flour, the programme was
able to self-select only the poorest households.114
Means testing collects information on the individual or household’s income or assets. It usually involves some
sort of corroboration method through sources such as utility bills or pay stubs. Households under a certain
threshold qualify. This method requires strong data availability.
Proxy means testing uses easily observable household characteristics to determine socio-economic status.
Some of the indicators, or proxies, include location and quality of the household’s dwelling, assets owned (land,
livestock, productive equipment), goods available in the household (such as radio, television or cell phone),
the composition of the household (e.g. single-parent household), and the education level and occupation
status of family members. Using Demographic and Health Surveys or other other types of surveys, such as
Household Budget Surveys (HBS) or Living Standards Measurement Studies (LSMS), each proxy is given a
weight based on its estimated impact on household expenditure. Data are collected through household visits.
Then, using the agreed weights, a score is calculated for each household. Households that score below the
cut-off point are eligible for the social protection programme. A problem with this approach is that it assumes
that all members of a household share the same socio-economic status, and thus neglects intra-household
inequalities. It also requires the availability of at least one recent Demographic Health Survey, and updating
such information can be very costly.

113 Conning and Kevane 2000.
114 FAO 2001.

83

In most countries, targeting is actually a combination of targeting approaches and targeting mechanisms,
which are often applied in various layers. For example, Mexico’s large conditional cash transfer programme,
Oportunidades, employs a targeting approach based on poverty, age category and geographic locations,
targeting poor families with 7-14-year-old children in both urban and rural areas. The targeting mechanisms
identify small rural communities of marginality (a multidimensional index): i.e. limited access to or utilization of
education and health infrastructure. Within those communities, targeting is also age categorical)—it focuses
on families with 7-14-year-old children. In parallel, in rural areas, a combination of community-based and
proxy means testing mechanisms are used. The poorest households are identified based on socio-economic
data from census gathering and then a community feedback mechanism is used to reclassify households. In
urban areas the programme has adopted a self-targeting on-demand application approach.

table 6.1 pros and cons of targeting mechanisms
Targeting
Mechanisms

Administrative
Costs

Susceptibility to
Inclusion and Exclusion
Errors

Political Implications

Means testing

High, accurate
data on income
are costly and very
difficult to assess.

Low, providing accurate
data are available.

Requires high statistical
capacity, degree of
intelligence required
to verify claims may be
unpalatable, politically
may be only way to
make acceptable to
elite.

Proxy indicators

Medium

Medium

Community-based

Low, no need
for data and can
be done quickly.
Might have
implicit costs
to community
cohesion if
targeting is
perceived as
unfair.

Variable, transparency
and flexibility hard to
achieve in practice.

Low

Low, if well designed.
However, targeting is
usually not the driving
feature of design.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

84

Self-targeting

Source: Based on Shepard, and Barrientos 2004.

Does not assess intrahousehold inequality.

Does not assess intrahousehold inequality.

Liable to local elite
capture and to replicate
existing forms of
discrimination. May
exacerbate divisions in
a community.

Can create stigma for
poorest and socially
excluded households
if it results in low
wages, or inferior food
payments.

Two emerging issues that are discussed in the primer and relate to the discussion on targeting are the need
for dynamic inclusion and flexible systems, where individuals can apply for benefits, update their information,
file appeals and grievances at any time; and integration across programmes and systems (including the
interoperability of information).
In terms of flexibility to incorporate new beneficiaries and change information, some targeting mechanisms,
such as proxy means testing (PMT), can be very static. They require data collection, which is only available
every set number of years, and result in static ranked lists of names that are fixed for many years. This can
bar new applicants from applying in interim years (e.g. if their situation changes or if they were missed
by the survey-sweep), and limit the ability of programmes and systems to respond to shocks. However, a
combination of increased capacity, integration (interoperability) and improved technology can make other
methods (such as means testing) more dynamic, and reduce the amount of data that needs to be directly
collected by applicants, since some data can come from data exchange with other administrative/information
systems.

85

ANNEX 4. REFERENCES
Antonopoulos, R., T. Masterson, and A. Zacharias, 2012. The Interlocking of time and income deficits: Revisiting
poverty measurement, informing policy responses. Undoing Knots, Innovating for Change Series, UNDP
Regional Centre for Latin America and the Caribbean. Available from: http://www.undp.org/content/dam/
undp/library/gender/Gender%20and%20Poverty%20Reduction/Time%20deficits%20poverty.pdf.
Arnold, C., Conway, T. and Greenslade, M., 2011. Cash Transfers Literature Review. London: Department for
International Development. Available from: http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/PDF/Articles/cash-transfers-literaturereview.pdf.
Attanasio, O., Pellerano, L., Reyes, S. P., 2008, “Building trust? Conditional cash transfer programmes and
social capital.” Institute of Fiscal Studies Working Paper (EWP0802). Available from: http://www.ifs.org.uk/
publications/4175.
Ayers, Jessica and Tim Forsyth, 2009. “Community-based adaptation to climate change”. Environment: Science
and Policy for Sustainable Development.July/August Available from: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/24188/.
Baird, Sarah, Jed Friedman and Norbert Schady, 2007. “Agregate Income Shocks and Infant Mortality in the
Developling World.” IIEP-WO-2010-07. Institute for International Policy, Gege Washington University.

86

Barca, Valentina and Richard Chirchi, 2014. Single Registries and Integrated MISs: De-mystifying data and
information management concepts. Governmentof Australia. Available from http://www.opml.co.uk/sites/
default/files/Barca%20and%20Chirchir%20(2014)%20Data%20and%20Information%20Managemnt%20
for%20Social%20Protection.pdf.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

Barder, Owen, 2015. “On World Humanitarian Day: Could We Do Better with Cash?”Center for Global
Development. Available from: http://www.cgdev.org/blog/world-humanitarian-day-cash-transfers.
Barrett, C. and J. G McPeak , 2004 . “Poverty Traps and Safety Nets.”Available from: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.496.8870&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
Barrett, C.B. 2014. “Index-Based Livestock Insurance (IBLI): Preliminary findings on the positive impacts of an
imperfect product”. Presented at Cornell University, 3 July 2014. Ithaca, NY: USA: Cornell University. https://
cgspace.cgiar.org/handle/10568/69306.
Barrientos, A. (2010). “Social Protection and Poverty”. UNRISD, Social Policy and Development Programme
Paper Number 42. Available from: http://www.unrisd.org/80256B3C005BCCF9/(httpPublications)/973B0F57C
A78D834C12576DB003BE255?OpenDocument.
Barrientos, Armando and Miguel Niño-Zarazúa, 2011. Social transfers and chronic poverty: Objectives, design,
reach and impact. Chronic Poverty Research Centre. Available from:www.chronicpoverty.org/uploads/...files/
socialtransfersfullreport.pdf .
Blixen, Sofia Maier, 2015. “Shedding light on hidden deprivations: time-income poverty and public policies
in Latin America: Lessons from the LIMTIP experiences. “ Unpublished paper for the Regional Human
Development Report 2016 for Latin America and the Caribbean.
Brazil, Ministry of Social Development, 2012. “The Bolsa Familia Programme (BFP).” Available from: http://www.
uncsd2012.org/content/documents/399BOLSA%20FAMILIA%20EM%20INGLES%20maio%202012_FINAL.pdf.
Cameron, A. Liza 2014. “Social Protection Programmes for Women in Developing Countries: How to design
social protection programmes that poor women can benefit from”. IZA World of Labor, May. Available from:
http://wol.iza.org/articles/social-protection-programs-for-women-in-developing-countries/long.

Cichon, Michael, Krzysztof Hagemejer and John Woodall, 2006. “Changing the paradigm in social security:
From fiscal burden to investing in people.” Social Security Department International Labour Office. Available
from: www.un.org/en/ecosoc/meetings/2006/forum/Statements/Cichon.pdf.
Conning, Jonathan and Michael Kevane, 2000. “Community-based Targeting Mechanisms for Social Safety
Nets.” Williams College, Department of Economics. Available from: web.williams.edu/Economics/wp/cbt.pdf.
Cutler, David, Felicia Knaul, Rafael Lonzano, Oscar Méndez, and Beatriz Zurita. 2002. “Financial Crisis, Health
Outcomes, and Ageing: Mexico in the 1980s and 1990s.” Journal of Public Economics 84(2): 279-303.
Davies, M. and others, 2009. “Climate Change Adaptation, Disaster Risk Reduction and Social Protection:
Complementary Roles in Agriculture and Rural Growth?” IDS Working Paper, Volume, Number 320. Available
from:
http://www.ids.ac.uk/publication/climate-change-adaptation-disaster-risk-reduction-and-socialprotection-complementary-roles-in-agriculture-and-rural-growth.
de Janvry, A., Sadoulet, E. and Vakis, R. 2010. Protecting vulnerable children from uninsured risks: Adapting
conditional cash transfer programs to provide broader safety nets. Well-being and Social Policy 6 (1): 161–183.
Dercon, Stefan, 2012. “Is green growth good for the poor?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No
6231. Available from: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/10/16835124/green-growth-goodpoor.
Devereux, Stephen, 2001. “Social Pensions in Namibia and South Africa.” IDS Discussion Paper 379, Sussex, IDS
Available from: https://www.ids.ac.uk/files/dp379.pdf.
Devereux, Stephen, 2012. “Social Protection for Enhanced Food Security in Sub-Saharan Africa”. UNDP Working
Paper 2012-10. Available from: http://www.undp.org/content/dam/rba/docs/Working%20Papers/Social%20
Protection%20Food%20Security.pdf.
Devereux, Stephen and J Allister McGregor, 2014. “Transforming Social Protection: Human Well-being and
Social Justice.” European Journal of Development Research (2014) 26, pp296–310.
DFID, 2011. “Cash Transfers Evidence Paper.” Evidence Paper, Policy Division, 2011.
FAO, 2001. Targeting for Nutrition Improvement: Resources for Advancing Nutritional Well-Being. Rome. 2001.
Available from: http://www.fao.org/docrep/004/Y1329E/y1329e00.htm.
Fernandez, A,. Jadotte, E. and Jahnsen, J. 2011. Addressing disaster risk through conditional cash transfer and
temporary employment programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. Background paper prepared for the
2011 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. Prepared by UNDP. Geneva, Switzerland: UNISDR.
http://www.fao.org/fsnforum/activities/discussions/social-protection-forestry.
FAO, 2015b. The State of Food and Agriculture 2015: Social Protection and Agriculture, Breaking the Cycle of
Rural Poverty. Rome. Available from: www.fao.org/3/a-i4910e.pdf.
Fernandez, Almudena and Luis F. Lopez-Calva, 2010. “Temporary Shocks Permanent Effects”. Estudios
Económicos Vol. 25 No 1. Available from: www.unicef.org/.../Fernandez_Impact_of_Economic_Crisis_on_the_
Wel.
Ferreira, Francisco and David Robalino, 2010. “Social Protection in Latin America: Achievements and
Limitations.” Policy Research Working Paper WPS5305. Available from http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/2010/05/12223835/social-protection-latin-america-achievements-limitations.
GIZ, 2013. Social Protection and its contribution to Social Cohesion and State Building.Available from https://
www.odi.org/resources/docs/7759.pdf.

87

Global Environment Facility (GEF) Evaluation Office, 2006. “The Role of Local Benefits in Global Environmental
Programs.” Global Environment Facility, Washington DC. Available from: https://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/
thegef.org/.../Local_Benefits-report-light-3meg.pdf
Grosh, M., and others, 2008. For Protection and Promotion: The Design and Implementation of Safety Nets.
World Bank, Washington D.C. Available from: http://info.worldbank.org/etools/docs/library/243170/Feb25_
Ses2_case%20for%20safety%20nets.pdf.
Handayani, Sri Wening and Babken Babajanian, 2012. “Social Protection for Older Persons: Social Pensions in
Asia.” Asian Development Bank, Philippines.
Hoddinott, Rosegrant, and Torero, 2012. “Hunger and Malnutrition.” Copenhagen Consensus, Challenge Paper,
2012.
Holmes, Rebecca and Nicola Jones, 2010. “How to design and implement gender-sensitive social protection
programmes.” ODI Toolkits. Available from: https://www.odi.org/resources/docs/6262.pdf.
Hu, Y. and F. Stewart, 2009. “Pension Coverage and Informal Sector Workers: International Experiences”,
OECD Working Papers on Insurance and Private Pensions, No. 31, OECD publishing, OECD. Available from:
doi:10.1787/227432837078.
ILO, 2008. “Can low-income countries afford basic social security?” Working Paper. Social Security Policy
Briefings, Paper 3. Available from: http://www.ilo.org/manila/publications/WCMS_126217/lang--en/index.
htm.

88

ILO, 2011. Social Protection Floor for a Fair and Inclusive Globalization. Report of the Advisory Group chaired by
Michele Bachelet. Availalbe from: http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_166292/
lang--en/index.htm.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

ILO and UNDP, 2011. “Inclusive and Resilient Development: The Role of Social Protection.” Prepared for G20
Development Group, 2010-1011.
ILO, United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNEGEEW) and UNDP, 2012.
Fighting inequality from the basics: The social protection floor and gender equality. Available from: http://
www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/gender/Gender%20and%20Poverty%20Reduction/Social%20
Protection%20Floor%20and%20GE.pdf.
ILO, 2014. “Social protection global policy trends 2010-2015: From fiscal consolidation to expanding social
protection: Key to crisis recovery, inclusive development and social justice.” Social Protecion Policy Papers, ILO,
Geneva. Available from: http://www.ilo.org/global/publications/working-papers/WCMS_319641/lang--en/
index.htm.
ILO, 2015a. Social Protection. RSBY: Extending social health protection to vulnerable population by using new
technologies. Available from: http://www.social-protection.org
ILO 2015b 2015. World Social Protection Report 2014-15. Available from: http://www.ilo.org/global/research/
global-reports/world-social-security-report/2014/lang--en/index.htm.
ILO, 2016. Social protection assessment-based national dialogue: A global guide. Available from: http://www.
social-protection.org/gimi/gess/RessourcePDF.action?ressource.ressourceId=53462.
ILO, 2016. Social Protection Progress towards universal health coverage: Rwanda. Available from: http://www.
social-protection.org<please check>
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, 2010. “UNAIDS Expanded Business Case: Enhancing Social
Protection”. Geneva. Available from: data.unaids.org/pub/.../2010/jc1879_social_protection_business_case_en.pdf.

Jones, Nicola and Maria Stavropoulou with Elizabeth Presler-Marshall, 2013. UN Women, Resilience for All?
Towards Gender-Responsive Social Protection in South-East Asia. UN Women. Available from: http://asiapacific.
unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2013/6/resilience-for-all-main-report#sthash.yFVxzYxY.dpuf.
Kabeer, Naila, 2010. “ Can the MDGs provides a Pathway to Social Justice? The challenges of intersecting
inequalities”. Institute for Development Studies, MDG Achievement Fund.
Kaplan, D. S. and S. Levy, 2014. “The evolution of Social Security Systems in Latin America”. In Social Insurance,
Informality, and Labor Markets: How to Protect Workers While Creating Good Jobs, Markus Frölich and others
eds. Oxford Scholarship Online.
Leaving no one behind: How linking social protection and humanitarian action can bridge the developmenthumanitarian divide.” A joint statement of social protection actors to the World Humanitarian Summit.
Available from: http://socialprotection.org/discover/publications/leaving-no-one-behind-how-linking-socialprotection-and-humanitarian-action.
Lee, Sangheon and Nina Torm, 2015.” Social security and firm performance: The case of Vietnamese SMEs”.
International Labour Review, Accepted Articles, Accepted manuscript online: 30 DEC 2015.
Legal Momentum Family Initiative and the MIT Workplace Center, 2005. Early Childhood Education for all: A
Wise Investment. Available from: http://web.mit.edu/workplacecenter/docs/Full%20Report.pdf.
Lieuw-Kie-Song, Maikel, 2011. “Integrating Public Works and Cash Transfers in Ethiopia: Implications for Social
Protection, Employment and Decent Work.” Working Paper, International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth.
Available from: http://www.ipc-undp.org/pub/IPCWorkingPaper84.pdf.
López-Calva, L.P. and Ortiz-Juárez, E. 2009. Evidence and policy lessons on the links between disaster risk and
poverty in Latin America: Methodology and summary of country studies. New York, USA: UNDP.
Luttrell, Cecilia and Caroline Moser, 2004. “Gender and Social Protection.” DFID, Theme Papers on Social
Protection.
McCarthy, J. and others, eds., 2001. Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Cambridge
University Press. Available from: https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg2/ar4_wg2_full_report.pdf.
Monchuk, Victoria. 2013. Reducing Poverty and Investing in People: The New Role of Safety Nets in Africa.
Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank Available from: https://openknowledge.worldbank.
org/handle/10986/16256.
Mupedziswa, R. and D. Ntseane, 2013. “The contribution of non-formal social protection to social development
in Botswana”. Development Southern Africa, 30(1), pp84-97.
OECD, 2009. Promoting Pro-Poor Growth: Social Protection. Available from: https://www.oecd.org/dac/
povertyreduction/43514563.pdf.
Ordoñez, Andrea and others, 2015. “Sharing the Fruits of Progress: Poverty Reduction in Ecuador”. ODI
Development Progress, Case Study Report. Available from: http://www.developmentprogress.org/publication/
sharing-fruits-progress-poverty-reduction-ecuador.
Ortiz, Isabel, Matthew Cummins and Kalaivani Karunanethy, 2015. “Fiscal Space for Social Protection: Options
to Expand Social Investments in 187 Countries” ESS Working Paper no. 48. ILO, Geneva.Available from http://
www.social-protection.org/gimi/gess/RessourcePDF.action?ressource.ressourceId=51537.
Oxfam America, 2013. Managing Risks to Agricultural Livelihoods: Impact Evaluation of the Harita Program
in Ethiopia, 2009-2012. Available from: https://www.oxfamamerica.org/publications/managing-risks-toagricultural-livelihoods-impact-evaluation-of-the-harita-program-in-tigray-ethiopia-20092012/.

89

Paxson, Christina, and Norbert Schady. 2005. “Child Health and Economic Crisis in Peru.” World Bank Economic
Review 19(2): 203-223.
Ramachandran, N and Dennis Garity, eds., 2012. Agroforestry – The Future of Global Land Use. Springer,
Netherlands.
Ravi, Arnjana and Nicole Tosh, 2012. “From Protection to Investment: Understanding the Global Shift to
Financially Inclusive Social Protection Payment Systems.” Global savings and social protection initiative (GSSP),
Global Assets Project, New America Foundation. Available from: http://www.newamerica.org/asset-building/
policy-papers/from-protection-to-investment/.
Remme, Michelle, and others, 2014. “Financing Structural Interventions: Going Beyond HIV-only value for money
assessments”. AIDS, 28(3):425-34. Available from: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261137845_
Financing_structural_interventions_Going_beyond_HIV-only_value_for_money_assessments.
Robalino, David, Laura Rawlings and Ian Walker, 2012. “Building Social Protection and Labor Systems: Concepts
and Operational Implications.” Background Paper for the World Bank 2012–2022 Social Protection and Labor
Strategy. World Bank, 2012.
Siegel, P. and Fuente, A. de la, 2010. “Mainstreaming natural disaster risk management into social protection
policies (and vice versa) in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Well-being and Social Policy 6 (1): 131–159.
Sabates-Wheeler, Rachel and Stephen Devereux, 2007. “Social Protection for Transformation.” IDS Bulletin,
Volume 38, Issue 3, pages 23–28, May 2007.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

90

Samson, Michael, 2009. “The impact of social transfers on growth, development, poverty and inequality in
developing countries.” In Building Decent Societies, Rethinking the Role of Social Security in Development,
Peter Townsend, ed., Palgrave Macmillan.
Samson, Michael, 2015. “Exit or Developmental Impact? The Role of ‘Graduation’ in Social Protection
Programmes”. IDS Bulletin, Volume 46 Number 2, March. Available from: http://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/
handle/123456789/7280.
Sharma, A. 2010. Rights-based Legal Guarantee as Development Policy: “A Discussion on the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)”. UNDP, New Delhi. Available from: www.ipc-undp.
org/pressroom/files/ipc163.pdf.
Shepard, Andrew, Rachel Marcus, Armando Barrientos, 2004. Policy Paper on Social Protection. DFID. Available
from: https://www.odi.org/resources/docs/1670.pdf.
Skoufias, Emmanuel and Susan W. Parker, 2001. “Conditional cash transfers and their impact on child work and
schooling.” International Food and Policy Research Institute, FCND Discussion Paper No. 123. Available from:
ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/16472/1/fc010123.pdf.
Slater, Rachel and John Farrington, 2009. Targeting of Social Transfers: A Review of for DFID. ODI, September
2009. Available from: https://www.odi.org/resources/docs/5494.pdf
Slater, R., R. Holmes and N. Mathers (2014), Food and Nutrition (in-)Security and Social Protection, OECD
Development Co-operation Working Papers, No. 15. Available from: http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org.
Soares, Fabio V., Rafael Perez Ribas and Osorio Rafael, 2010. “Evaluating the Impact of Brazil’s Bolsa Familia:
Cash Transfer Programmes in Comparative Perspectives.” International Poverty Centre, IPCevaluation note.
Available from ttp://www.ipc-undp.org/pub/IPCEvaluationNote1.pdf
Soares, Sergeri and Natalia Satyro, 2009. “O Programa Bolsa Família: Desenho Institucional, Impactos e
Possibilidades Futuras.” IPEA, Texto Para Discussão No 1424. Available from: www.ipea.gov.br/portal/index.
php?option...id.

Standing, Guy, 2007. “How Cash transfers Boost Work and Economic Security”. DESA Working Paper No. 58.
Available from: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/7189028.pdf.
Thakur, Sarojini Ganju (Commonwealth Secretariat), Catherine Arnold (DFID), and Tina Johnson (DFID), 2009.
“Gender and Social Protection”. Commonwealth Secretariat Discussion Paper, Number 3, January. Available
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.14217/5k3w8fb9pbxp-en.
TEEB, 2010. The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Mainstreaming the Economics of Nature: A
synthesis of the approach, conclusions and recommendations of TEEB. Available from: http://www.teebweb.
org/publication/mainstreaming-the-economics-of-nature-a-synthesis-of-the-approach-conclusions-andrecommendations-of-teeb/.
Ulrichs, M. and Roelen, K., 2012. “Equal Opportunities for All? -A Critical Analysis of Mexico’s Oportunidades.
IDS Working Paper Volume 2012 Number 413 and CSP Working Paper Number 7. Brighton, UK: Institute of
Development Studies. Available from: https://www.ids.ac.uk/files/dmfile/Wp413.pdf.
UN, 2015. Draft outcome document of the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda. Available from: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/summit.
UNDP, 2012a. Innovative Financing for Development: A New Model for Development Finance? Discussion
Paper. New York Available from: http://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/Poverty%20Reduction/
Development%20Cooperation%20and%20Finance/InnovativeFinancing_Web%20ver.pdf.
UNDP, 2012b. “Triple Wins for Sustainable Development: Case Studies of Sustainable Development in Practice.”
Available from: http://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/Cross-Practice%20generic%20theme/
Triple-Wins-for-Sustainable-Development-web.pdf
UNDP, 2013. “Evaluation of the Role of UNDP in Supporting National Achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals.” UNDP Independent Evaluation Office.
UNDP, 2014a. Changing with the World: UNDP Strategic Plan 2014-2017. Available from: http://www.undp.org/
content/undp/en/home/librarypage/corporate/Changing_with_the_World_UNDP_Strategic_Plan_2014_17.html.
UNDP, 2014b. “Discussion Paper: Cash transfers and HIV Prevention”. Available from: http://www.undp.org/
content/dam/undp/library/HIV-AIDS/HIV%20MDGs%20and%20Development%20Planning/UNDP%20
Cash%20Transfers%20and%20HIV%20Prevention%20Web%20Final.pdf.
UNDP, 2015a. Generating multiple benefits from Ecosystem -based Adaptation in mountain ecosystems.
Learning Brief. Available from: http://www.undp-alm.org/resources/project-brief-fact-sheet/learning-brief-2generating-multiple-benefits-ecosystem-based.
UNDP, 2015b. Making the Case for Ecosystem- based Adaptation: The Global Mountain EbA Programme
in Nepal, Peru and Uganda. New York. Available from: http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/
librarypage/poverty-reduction/making-the-case-for-ecosystem-based-adaptation.html.
UNDP, 2015c. “Piloting Weather Insurance for Ethiopian Farmers to Build Resilience.” Available from: http://
www.et.undp.org/content/ethiopia/en/home/presscenter/articles/2015/10/23/piloting-insurance-forethiopian-farmers-to-build-resilience.html.
UNDP, 2015d. Social Protection in Africa. Discussion Paper for the International Seminar on Social Protection
in Africa.
UNDP, 2016. “Our Projects”. Available from: http://open.undp.org/#2016.
UNDP and ILO, 2011. Sharing Innovative Experiences: Successful Social Protection Floor Experiences. Volume 18.
Available from: http://www.ilo.org/secsoc/information-resources/publications-and-tools/books-and-reports/WCMS_
SECSOC_20840/lang--en/index.htm.

91

UNDP and UNCDF, 2013. “Strengthening the Governance of Social Protection: The Role of Local Government,
Regional Analysis”. Available from: http://www.asia-pacific.undp.org/content/dam/rbap/docs/Research%20
&%20Publications/democratic_governance/RBAP-DG-2014-Strengthening-Governance-of-SocialProtection.pdf?download.
UNDP India, 2011. Social Protection that Works for PLHIV: A Compendium of Case Studies from Eight States.
Available from: http://www.undp.org/content/dam/india/docs/social_protection_that_works_for_plhiv_a_
compendium_of_case_studies_from_8_states.pdf.
UNDP India, 2012. Greening Rural Development in India, Volume 1. Available from: http://www.in.undp.org/
content/india/en/home/library/environment_energy/greening-rural-development-in-india.html.
UNDP, UNICEF, OXFAM and GFDRR, 2014 “Disaster Risk Reduction makes Development Sustainable: A Call for
Action.” Available from: www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/.../UNDP_CPR_CTA_20140901.pdf.
UNESCAP, 2015. Time for Equality: The Role of Social Protection In Reducing Inequalities in Asia and the Pacific.
Available from: http://www.unescap.org/sites/default/files/SDD%20Time%20for%20Equality%20report_
final.pdf
UNICEF, 2016. “Zambia: Social Protection Budget Brief.” Review of Budget Performance and 2016 Allocations.
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR), 2011. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk
Reduction, 2011. “Revealing Risk, Redefining Development”. Available from:www.preventionweb.net/gar.

92

UNRISD, 2012. “Social Dimensions of Green Economy.” UNRISD Research and Policy Brief 12. Available from:
http://www.unrisd.org/80256B3C005BCCF9/search/84781D22707BF025C1257A0E0054A320?OpenDocument.

Leaving No One Behind: A Social Protection Primer for Practicioners

Webersik, Chistian and Christian Klose, 2010. “Environmental Change and Political instability in Haiti and the
Dominican Republic: Explaining the Divide”.Paper presented to the CSCW Working Group 3 Workshop, Oslo,
16‐17 December. Available from: https://www.prio.org/Events/Event/?x=7945.
WIDI Mindanao Project, 2016. “Scaling-up risk transfer mechanisms for climate vulnerable farming communities
in Mindanao” Volume 1, Issue 1, January 2016.
World Bank, 2006. The role of local benefits in global environmental programs. Global environment facility
evaluation report no. GEF 30. Washington, DC. Available from: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/2006/01/7495833/role-local-benefits-global-environmental-programs.
World Bank, 2015a. Reaching the Poorest Through Strengthening the Social Safety Net System in Pakistan.
World Bank, Projects & Operations April 2015.
World Bank, 2015b. The State of Social Safety Nets, 2015. Available from: http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/2015/07/24741765/state.

Empowered lives. Resilient nations.

United Nations Development Programme
304 E 45th Street
10th Floor
New York, NY, 10017 USA
Copyright 2016, UNDP Cover Photo

