UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

UNDP LAC C19 PDS No. 24

Policy Responses to the Pandemic for
COVID-19 in Latin America and the
Caribbean: The Use of Cash Transfer
Programs and Social Protection
Information Systems
Guillermo M. Cejudo, Cynthia L. Michel, Pablo de los Cobos
Center for Research and Teaching in Economics, CIDE
Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has made evident the unfulfilled promise of social protection in Latin America and the Caribbean
(LAC). Governments in LAC have used cash transfer programs (CTPs) to cushion the social and economic effects of the
pandemic. In this document we describe how these programs have served as a vehicle to reach vulnerable populations.
We show that LAC countries have used their existing social protection information systems to reach new populations,
as well as to deliver cash benefits. Governments’ responses were conditioned by the programs’ current coverage and
the registries’ interoperability with other sources of information. Specifically, we analyze the responses to the pandemic
distinguishing the ways in which countries innovated with their programs, along with the benefits’ coverage and size.
Additionally, we study social information systems: reviewing the characteristics of both social registries and single
beneficiary registries (existence, coverage, and interoperability).
We found that 64 CTPs were used in the region (in 24 out of 33 countries), 37 of which were emergency bonuses
(implemented in 21 countries). However, more than half of the interventions were directed at a small proportion of the
population (directly benefiting less than 10% of it) and consisted of total additional benefits lower than a minimum
monthly wage. We show that most CTPs in response to the pandemic used pre-existing information, both to register and
select the beneficiaries (81% of the programs) and to route the payments (73%).
Based on this analysis, we suggest three tasks for the coming years: to consolidate social protection information systems,
to foster the use of this information for the design, implementation and evaluation of public interventions, and to rethink
the role of CTPs as part of social protection systems.

www.latinamerica.undp.org

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 1

A Conceptual Framework for Analyzing the Economic Impact of COVID-19 and its Policy Implications
By Constantino Hevia and Andy Neumeyer

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 2

Suggestions for the emergency
By Santiago Levy

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 3

The economic impact of COVID-19 on Venezuela: the urgency of external financing

By Daniel Barráez and Ana María Chirinos-Leañez
UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 4

Social and economic impact of the COVID-19 and policy options in Honduras
By Andrés Ham

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 5

COVID-19 and external shock: Economic impacts and policy options in Peru
By Miguel Jaramillo and Hugo Ñopo

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 6

Social and Economic Impact of COVID-19 and Policy Options in Argentina
By María Laura Alzúa and Paula Gosis

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 7

International financial cooperation in the face of Latin America’s economic crisis
By José Antonio Ocampo

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 8

COVID-19 and social protection of poor and vulnerable groups in Latin America: a conceptual framework.
By Nora Lustig and Mariano Tommasi

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 9

Social and economic impact of the COVID-19 and policy options in Jamaica
By Manuel Mera

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 10

Social and economic impact of COVID-19 and policy options in Uruguay
By Alfonso Capurro, Germán Deagosto, Sebastián Ithurralde and Gabriel Oddone

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 11

Coronavirus in Colombia: vulnerability and policy options
By Andres Alvarez, Diana León, María Medellín, Andres Zambrano and Hernando Zuleta

UNDP LAC C19 PDS N°. 12

COVID-19 and vulnerability: a multidimensional poverty perspective in El Salvador
By Rodrigo Barraza, Rafael Barrientos, Xenia Díaz, Rafael Pleitez and Víctor Tablas.
UNDP country office El Salvador

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 13

Development challenges in the face of COVID-19 in Mexico. Socio-economic overview
UNDP country office Mexico

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

2

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 14 A

Lessons from COVID-19 for a Sustainability Agenda in Latin America and the Caribbean
By Diana Carolina León and Juan Camilo Cárdenas

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 14 B

Latin America and the Caribbean: Natural Wealth and Environmental Degradation in the XXI Century
By Diana Carolina León and Juan Camilo Cárdenas

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 15

Social and Economic Impacts of the COVID-19 and Policy Option in the Dominican Republic
By Sócrates Barinas and Mariana Viollaz

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 16

The Bahamas Country Note: Impact of COVID-19 and policy options
By Manuel Mera

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 17

Promoting socio-economic recovery in Paraguay Report – Economic Reactivation strategies during
COVID-19

UNDP country office Paraguay
UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 18

The Coronavirus and the challenges for women’s work in Latin America
By Diana Gutiérrez, Guillermina Martin, Hugo Ñopo

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 19

COVID-19 and primary and secondary education: the impact of the crisis and public policy implications for
Latin America and the Caribbean
By Sandra García Jaramillo

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 20

Challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic in the health of women, children, and adolescents in Latin America
and the Caribbean
By Arachu Castro

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 21

Planning a Sustainable Post-Pandemic Recovery in Latin America and the Caribbean
By Mauricio Cárdenas and Juan José Guzmán Ayala

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 22

COVID-19 in Bolivia: On the path to recovering development
UNDP Bolivia Office

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 23

Do we Need to Rethink Debt Policy in Latam?
By Federico Sturzenegger

UNDP LAC C19 PDS Nº. 24

Policy Responses to the Pandemic for COVID-19 in Latin America and the Caribbean: The Use of Cash Transfer
Programs and Social Protection Information Systems
By Guillermo M. Cejudo, Cynthia L. Michel, Pablo de los Cobos

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

3

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Disclaimer:
Policy Responses to the Pandemic for COVID-19 in Latin America and the Caribbean: The Use of Cash Transfer
Programs and Social Protection Information Systems
UNDP partners with people at all levels of society to help build nations that can withstand crisis, and drive and
sustain the kind of growth that improves the quality of life for everyone. On the ground in nearly 170 countries and
territories, we offer a global perspective and local insight to help empower lives and build resilient nations.
Copyright © UNDP 2020
All rights reserved Published in the United States of America | United Nations Development Programme | One
United Nations Plaza, New York, NY 10017, USA
The views, designations, and recommendations that are presented in this report do not necessarily reflect the
official position of UNDP.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

4

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Introduction to the series:

Evidence, Experience, and Pertinence in Search for Effective Policy
Alternatives
The COVID-19 pandemic is one of the most serious
challenges the world has faced in recent times. The total
cost in terms of human lives is yet to unfold. Alongside
the cost of lives and deep health crisis, the world is witnessing an economic downfold that will severely impact
the wellbeing of large parts of the population in the years
to come. Some of the measures that are currently being
used to counteract the pandemic may impact our future
lives in non-trivial ways. Understanding the association
between different elements of the problem to broaden
the policy space, with full awareness of the economic and
social effects that they may bring, is the purpose of this
series.
Thus far, the impossibility of targeted isolation of infected individuals and groups has led to policies of social distancing that impose a disproportionately high
economic and social cost around the world. The combination of policies such as social distancing, lockdowns,
and quarantines, imply a slowdown or even a complete
stop in production and consumption activities for an uncertain period of time, crashing markets and potentially leading to the closure of businesses, sending millions
of workers home. Labor, a key factor of production, has
been quarantined in most sectors in the economy, borders have been closed and global value chains have been
disrupted. Most estimates show a contraction of the level
of output globally. For the Latin America and Caribbean
region, the consensus forecasts are at -3 to -4%, and it
is not until 2022 that the region is expected to go back
to its pre-crisis output levels in scenarios that foresee a
U-shaped crisis pattern. According to ECLAC, more than
30 million people could fall into poverty in the absence
of active policies to protect or substitute income flows to
vulnerable groups.
We face a crisis that requires unconventional responses. We are concerned about the level-effect: the impact
of the crisis on the size of the economies and their capacity to recover growth after the shock. But we are equally
concerned about the distributional impact of the shock.
The crisis interacts with pre-existing heterogeneity in
asset holdings, income-generation capacity, labor conditions, access to public services, and many other aspects

that make some individuals and households particularly vulnerable to an economic freeze of this kind. People
in the informal markets, small and micro entrepreneurs,
women in precarious employment conditions, historically excluded groups, such as indigenous and afro-descendants, must be at the center of the policy response.
UNDP, as the development agency of the United Nations, has a long tradition of accompanying policymaking in its design, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation. It has a mandate to respond to changing
circumstances, deploying its assets to support our member states in their pursuit of integrated solutions to complex problems. This series aims at drawing from UNDPs
own experience and knowledge globally and from the
expertise and capacity of our partner think tanks and
academic institutions in Latin America and the Caribbean. It is an attempt to promote a collective reflection on
the response to the COVID-19 health crisis and its economic and social effects on our societies. Timeliness is a
must. Solutions that rely on evidence, experience, and
reasoned policy intuition –coming from our rich history
of policy engagement– are essential to guide this effort.
This series also contributes to the integrated approach
established by the UN reform and aspires to become an
important input into the coherent response of the United
Nations development system at the global, regional, and
national levels.
Ben Bernanke, former Governor of the US Federal Reserve, reminds us in his book The Courage to Act that
during crises, people are distinguished by those who
act and those who fear to act. We hope this policy documents series will contribute to the public debate by providing timely and technically solid proposals to support
the many who are taking decisive actions to protect the
most vulnerable in our region.

Luis F. Lopez-Calva
United Nations Development Programme
Regional Director, Latin America and the Caribbean
New York, March 2020

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

5

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

1.

Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has made evident the unfulfilled promise of social protection in Latin America and
the Caribbean (LAC).1 In this region, the right to health is not secured for everyone, many households’ income is
especially vulnerable to a decline in economic activity, and losing a formal job means an immediate loss of income
and contributory social security benefits. In this context, LAC governments have responded to the pandemic with
interventions that seek to reduce its economic and social effects, particularly on people living in poverty or who have
seen their income drop (Lustig et al., 2020). Some interventions are social benefits activated in case of an unforeseen
event (such as illness, or the loss of a job), that depend on contributory payments and membership to a social security
institution: for example, unemployment insurance. Others have consisted of measures for people to keep their jobs –
such as wage subsidies, reductions on social security contributions, or loans to businesses. Finally, the most frequent
intervention has been the use of existing or new cash transfer programs (CTPs) to reach the most vulnerable or
unprotected population, which are seldom covered by contributory social security schemes (Rubio et al., 2020).
Although the benefits and impact of CTPs are not equivalent to those of social protection systems, they are
instruments already in place in these countries. Through them, it was possible to reach the population almost
immediately, addressing one of the most generalized consequences of the pandemic: loss of income. While these
programs have been devised as secondary to securing social protection, the large number of workers in the informal
economy of the region (53%) has made CTPs a type of intervention frequently used by governments (Cecchini et al.,
2015). More importantly, these programs already had information systems and channels to deliver payments, with
which governments were able to reach and deliver social benefits to a especially vulnerable sector of the population.
At the same time, these virtues reveal the main shortcoming of CTPs: they exclude informal workers who were not
living in poverty, or those who had a formal job but lost it during the pandemic.
The extent to which governments have used CTPs has depended on their political preferences and their fiscal
capacity. Nevertheless, the scope of these measures has also depended on governments’ capacity to identify
populations and deliver social benefits. This capacity is associated with the information they have about people.
In this document, we analyze how CTPs have been used to address the COVID-19 pandemic’s economic and social
consequences. Specifically, we focus on how governments created or adapted this type of programs, as well as on
how they used social protection information systems for those purposes.
We argue that, although the effectiveness of these interventions to compensate for people’s income drop is
determined by each program’s design attributes (e.g., payments’ amount, frequency of delivery, and coverage), they
are predetermined by governments’ capacity for identifying the population in need. We explain how existing CTPs
served as a vehicle to identify and provide social benefits to the most vulnerable population, with greater or lesser
success depending on these programs’ coverage prior to the pandemic and on their records’ interoperability with
other sources of existing information.
We found that 24 out of 33 countries innovated in their CTPs with new programs (emergency bonuses), vertical
expansions (increasing social benefits’ size), horizontal expansions (incorporating new beneficiaries into existing
programs), or adaptations (bringing forward payments or changing its modality). Creating new programs was the most
frequent type of intervention: 21 countries implemented 37 new emergency bonuses (57 percent of innovations). For
countries with available information, we found that more than half of their interventions were directed at a small
proportion of the population (directly benefiting less than 10% of it) and consisted of additional total benefits lower
1 Social protection implies guaranteeing welfare for everyone. Sometimes, this occurs through contributory social security –with programs usually tied to

employment– and, other times, through social assistance —with non-contributory and generally targeted programs– (United Nations, 2018).

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

6

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

than a monthly minimum wage. Finally, the analysis shows that most of the CTPs that respond to the pandemic
also used existing information, both to register and select the beneficiaries (81% of the programs) and to route the
payments (73%).
In the next section, we explain social protection information systems and their main attributes. Then, we describe
the different scenarios that people faced to get access to extraordinary cash benefits by their governments,
according to the pandemic’s impact on their income and the social protection regime to which they belong given
their employment status. After that, we explain our methodology for analyzing how governments used CTPs and
information systems during the pandemic. Later, we show the results of this analysis, distinguishing the ways in which
countries innovated with their programs, the coverage and size of the benefits provided and the quality of their social
protection information systems. Finally, we summarize the findings and suggest three agendas to consolidate the role
of CTPs and social information systems as part of social protection systems in LAC.

Social protection information systems
The decline in households’ income caused by the pandemic has resulted in the deployment of different policy
instruments, particularly CTPs, by governments around the world (ECLAC, 2020a; Gentilini et al., 2020; Rubio et al.,
2020). Their effectiveness in counteracting the consequences on households, however, has varied among countries.
Even if there were economic resources and political will to support the population, the implementation of this type of
programs requires extensive administrative capacity, which is different in each case (López-Calva, 2020).
The administrative capacity is largely determined by governments’ ability for identifying and providing benefits to
the population in need (Lodge & Wegrich, 2014; Wu et al., 2015). Therefore, social protection information systems have
the potential to become powerful platforms for inclusion (Leite et al., 2017). This is especially true in countries where
social benefits are provided by different sources, and not predominantly by an integrated social protection system.
In these cases, information systems can help in responding more efficiently –by reducing administrative burdens for
both citizens and bureaucracies– and more effectively –to reach the people to which they are seeking to provide
social benefits–.
When the provision of social benefits is fragmented, it is the citizens who –carrying out administrative procedures
with different agencies– end up bearing the costs (of time and money) (Moynihan & Herd, 2010; Peeters & Nieto
2020; Chudnovsky & Peeters, 2019). But updated information systems also allow bureaucracies to make processes
more efficient: they facilitate the task of identifying the target population by having information about people’s
socioeconomic characteristics, from which they can determine who is eligible to each social benefit and where they
are located (Leite et al., 2017) (see Box 1).

Box 1. What are social protection information systems?
Social protection information systems are usually comprised of several sources of information: registries of contributory social security
institutes, social registries —socioeconomic information on potential beneficiaries from social assistance programs–, and single beneficiary
registries– information on those who are benefited by social programs (Beazley et al., 2019; Lindert et al., 2020)–.
The more integrated the systems are, the better they will be at facilitating the provision of a wide range of goods and services to target
populations. Integrated social protection information systems are more than a list of (potential) beneficiaries; they are registries that articulate
three different processes: identification, intake and registry of possible beneficiaries, and assessment of needs and conditions to determine their
eligibility.
When these systems work, agencies responsible for social programs can make decisions about people’s eligibility, provide benefits to them,
and know how their socioeconomic conditions are evolving (Leite et al., 2017). Although it is difficult to have information in real time, these
systems tend to be updated with single beneficiary registries, which keep records of the population that receives social programs (Barca, 2017;
Chirchir & Farooq, 2016).

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

7

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

A good information system is usually comprised of social registries, (single)2 beneficiary registries of social assistance
programs, and administrative registries of contributory social security and health services. Social registries must have
mechanisms to intake and assess the needs of potential beneficiaries to social assistance programs (Barca, 2017;
Beazley et al., 2019; Chirchir & Farooq, 2016). There are two types of social registries (Leite et al., 2017; Lindert et al.,
2020): those used by governments to actively gather information on the living conditions of households or individuals,
through censuses or targeted searches in territories with greater poverty; and those that operate on demand, when
people who require social assistance provide information to be registered with the possibility of being beneficiaries
in the future. Most LAC countries have a combination of both.
Single beneficiary registries, which systematize information about people who already receive (at least) one social
program (Barca, 2018; Chirchir & Farooq, 2016), allow governments to identify which people receive social programs
and enable coordination among various programs that seek to reach the same person and avoid duplication. They
also have information on payment methods (which can be used by other programs), thereby reducing administrative
burdens for both government and individuals. When they are interoperable with social registries, single beneficiary
registries can better track people’s social needs.
Social registries and single beneficiary registries may also have interoperability with other non-social registries or
administrative records (Chirchir & Farooq, 2016; Lindert et al., 2020). They may be interoperable with single identification
systems (identity cards), to identify individuals within a given population. They may also be interoperable with other
administrative registries such as social security tax or civil records, which helps to avoid program’s duplications and to
detect people that, given the changes in their income, have become eligible for social assistance. Finally, there could
be interoperability with information collected through population censuses and surveys, which would enable the
systematization of information about the conditions of specific territories and, during an emergency, complement
the assessments made from social registries or single beneficiary registries. Of course, interoperability does not
guarantee updating information in real time and, therefore, it does not guarantee timely responses.
To be useful, information systems must have complete and updated information, with good coverage and
mechanisms for validating and updating the information (Barca & O’Brien, 2017; Beazley et al., 2019). Similarly, it is
important to know how this information is used: how many programs or institutions use or report into the system, as
well as whether the information is mandatory or optional when designing and implementing social programs.
The fragmentation of social protection systems in LAC implies that people’s social information is dispersed: for
some people, their information is kept in contributory social security institutions’ registries and, for others, the
information regarding their social conditions is available in the records of one or many non-contributory programs.
In these cases, the need for coordination and exchange of information between government agencies and levels
of government is essential to provide social benefits. In these cases, governments face greater difficulties when
obtaining the specific socioeconomic characteristics of the general population: particularly when, due to a crisis,
workers migrate from one system to another. Even in countries with (non-contributory) health systems that, for
their operation, have registries of a vast proportion of its population, such as Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico or Peru,
their usefulness for targeting new social benefits will depend on governments’ capacity to link such registries to
other sources of information. The more fragmented the provision of social benefits, the greater the need for the
information systems to be integrated.

2 As mentioned by Leite et al. (2017), the literature on social protection information systems often uses interchangeably the terms single, unique, unified and

integrated to talk about information systematization processes that are a common gateway for multiple programs or a collection of standardized information
in the same database.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

8

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

People’s experiences in fragmented social protection systems
In LAC countries, social protection is mainly guaranteed through a contributory social security system while others
rely on non-contributory programs (universal and targeted), including CTPs. Although the number of these programs
has significantly increased in the region, the importance they have as a component of social protection regimes varies
among countries (see Graph 1).
Graph 1. Percentage of people in Latin American and Caribbean countries living in a household that receives a
cash transfer program, 2017–2018

Note 1 (calculations): this calculation is the sum of the percentage of people living in a household that receives a national conditional transfer program, as well as the
percentage of people receiving a non-contributory social pension.
Note 2 (visualization): dotted lines indicate subregional averages (in colors) and overall (gray).
Note 3 (dates): in general, the reporting year for the countries is the most up-to-date information for 2017 or 2018; however, in the case of Barbados and Bermuda is
2014; for Saint Kitts and Nevis and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is 2015; of the Bahamas, El Salvador (Apoyo a Comunidades Solidarias), Ecuador (Bono Joaquín
Gallegos Lara y Complemento del Bono de Desarrollo Humano) and Venezuela is 2016. The information for Mexico is from 2019 and for Costa Rica (Crecemos) is from
2020 because these countries have recently created programs.
Source: authors’ elaboration with data from ECLAC (2020b y 2020c).

These differences are relevant to understand the relative importance of each of the sources that make up the social
protection information systems in LAC countries. For those with contributory social security systems with broad
coverage, the importance of CTPs’ (single) beneficiary registries, for example, will be less than that of the contributory
social security registries. Because contributory social security is tied to employment, in these cases governments
could find out relatively quickly who has lost their job or who has had a reduction in their salary: both scenarios
must be registered in the system of social security so employers stop paying their contributions. In contrast, when
contributory social security coverage is narrow, guaranteeing social protection depends mainly on non-contributory
social programs. When the latter have broad coverage, the relative importance of the single beneficiary registries, for
example, will be greater than that of the registries of contributory social security institutions.
Providing social protection requires governments with instruments capable not only to identify and deliver social
benefits to the population they already have registered, but to react to changes in their working conditions, formality,
and income. This provision demands for clear and efficient intake and registration processes, that allow for updating
persons or households’ socioeconomic information. Reaction to changes in socioeconomic conditions is even more
important in an emergency, when these changes occur for a vast number of people, almost simultaneously.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

9

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

The COVID-19 pandemic has triggered changes in socioeconomic conditions for many people (see Table 1). There
are, for example, people who had a formal job and access to contributory social security and that, due to the crisis,
lost their employment, (most or all of their) income and social security benefits. There are also those whose informal
job allowed them to generate a certain level of income enough for being excluded from social assistance, but that
lost their job and income with the pandemic, and lack social benefits –whom López-Calva (2020) refers to as the
missing middle–. For those in these two groups, having social protection depends on governments’ capacity and
flexibility to identify and incorporate them, since they are not automatically covered by a CTP. Third, there are people
who were not covered neither by contributory social security nor by social assistance programs and who before and
after the pandemic would need to be targeted by a public intervention –the hidden poor in terms of López-Calva
(2020)–. Finally, there are people who did not have social protection, but whose living conditions do not depend,
before or after the pandemic, directly on public interventions. Along with this group, there are people who already
had contributory social security or social assistance and that, after the pandemic’s impact, maintain the same living
conditions: either they are still entitled to contributory social security benefits because they keep their jobs or they
continue receiving the benefits of a social program because their socioeconomic characteristics have not changed.
Table 1. Population and different experiences before COVID-19
Social protection of
people before COVID-19

Population without income
change due to COVID-19

Population with income decreased due to COVID-19

Population before COVID-19

Population in poverty before COVID-19

With contributory social
security coverage

They maintain their formal
employment and contributory
social security benefits

They lose their formal employment and
They lose formal employment
social security benefits. Their level of poverty and social security benefits.
or vulnerability is worsened
They can fall into poverty
or vulnerability due to the
pandemic

Without contributory
social security coverage,
but with social
assistance coverage

They maintain their informal
employment. They continue to
receive social assistance

They lose their informal employment. They
continue to receive social assistance. Their
level of poverty or vulnerability is worsened

They lose their informal
employment. They continue to
receive social assistance. They can
fall into poverty or vulnerability
due to the pandemic

Without contributory
social security or social
assistance coverage, but
identified in the social
registry

They maintain their informal
employment. They do not
benefit from social assistance
programs

They lose their informal employment. They
lack social protection, and the level of
poverty or vulnerability is worsened. Easily
identifiable to receive social assistance

They lose their informal
employment. They lack social
protection and may fall into
poverty due to the pandemic.
Easily identifiable to receive
social assistance (missing middle)

Without contributory
social security or social
assistance coverage and
without being identified
in the social registry

They maintain their informal
employment. They do not
benefit from social assistance
programs (includes the hidden
poor)

They lose their informal employment.
They do not benefit from social assistance
programs. Their level of poverty or
vulnerability is accentuated (hidden poor in
worse conditions)

They lose their informal
employment. They do not
benefit from social assistance
programs. May fall into poverty
or vulnerability to the pandemic
(missing middle)

Non-poor population before
COVID-19

Source: authors’ elaboration based on López-Calva (2020).

In the following pages, we analyze how LAC countries responded through CTPs to the COVID-19 pandemic. We
also explain the use they made of their social protection information systems to reach and provide benefits to the
population.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

10

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Methodology
The purpose of this analysis is to explain how countries have been able to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic in
terms of social protection. We focus on CTPs and on the social information systems they have used to identify and
deliver social benefits to the population. For that purpose, we analyze the responses made by LAC countries and the
specific characteristics of the social information systems of each country to see how they shaped policy responses.
The first section, regarding the CTPs implemented during the pandemic, is based on previous work that
systematized these responses (Blofield et al., 2020; ECLAC, 2020a; Gentilini et al., 2020; Rubio et al., 2020) and the
review of governments’ websites, information provided by the authorities through social media, and press releases.3
The analysis focuses on the use of CTPs (conditional or unconditional), particularly on programs that are new or that
modified some design attribute in response to the pandemic. So, we excluded already existing unmodified programs,
as we assume that they were not used by governments as vehicles to serve the population affected by the pandemic.4
Likewise, we excluded responses that required affiliation to a contributory social security system, those that –instead
of delivering money or vouchers– delivered goods or food, or that guaranteed basic infrastructure services, as well as
those granting credits or subsidies in order to preserve employment or prevent businesses from closing.
To determine the different ways in which these programs were modified to respond to the pandemic, we
categorized them based on the typology of social policy responses in emergency contexts developed by Oxford
Policy Management (2015) (see Table 2).
Table 2. Categorization of innovative responses to the pandemic
Variable

Definition

Categories

Innovation

Innovative attribute of the CTPs

- New program: intervention designed in response to the pandemic
- Vertical expansion: increasing the payments’ size to all or some beneficiaries
- Horizontal expansion: increasing coverage
- Adaptation: CTPs’ payments brought forward or changes in the delivery
mechanism5

Information to identify
and register

Use of existing information to
select beneficiaries

Information to provide
benefits

Use of existing information of
payment methods to deliver the
transfer

- Yes6
- No

Source: authors’ elaboration.

Then, for the analysis of these countries’ social protection information systems, we use the analytical categories
defined by Barca & O’Brien (2017) and Lindert et al. (2020): a) existence of a social registry, along with population
coverage rates; b) existence of a single beneficiary registry; and c) interoperability with other information systems.7

3 The characteristics of the studied programs are those reported by each country.
4 The complete compilation of the programs and information systems –along with their code– is available at the online repository (github.com/pCobosAlcala/
CashTransfers_COVID19).
5 We do not consider as adaptation the decision in some existing programs to suspend the conditionality of transfers to school attendance, since it was due

to the closure of educational centers (Blofield et al., 2020).

6 As some programs had mixed approaches, that is, they used existing information while establishing new mechanisms to gather new information, the cate-

gories can be understood in the following dichotomous way: programs that at some point used existing information or programs in which the entire selection
or payment methods was completely new.
7 The data collected corresponds to what is reported by the countries themselves in public documents or on their social information platforms.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

11

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Once policy responses and their respective information systems are analyzed, we compare them in order to
identify both the alternatives and the limitations that each country had when designing and implementing their
CTPs during the emergency.

Cash transfers as an instrument against the pandemic
To reduce the chain of contagion, LAC countries established measures to restrict mobility in public, work, or
educational spaces. This decision implied a significant reduction in economic activity, which affected people’s income.
To offset this effect and secure basic living conditions, governments implemented various policy responses: new
programs, vertical expansions, horizontal expansions, and adaptations (see Table 3).
Given the limited coverage of the contributory social security systems in most countries of the region,8 CTPs were
the best available option to reach people. By early August 2020 (five months after the first cases were detected in the
region), 24 out of 33 LAC countries had used 64 CTPs to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.9 However, the number
of programs is not the best indicator for assessing the magnitude of the response. The scope –in terms of coverage
and size of the social benefits– of these interventions also matters. For this reason, in this section we study, first, how
governments created and modified their CTPs. Then, we analyze their scope to put these efforts into perspective.

Innovations in CTPs as response to the pandemic
To face the pandemic, most countries responded with new CTPs. In total, 21 countries created 37 new programs. In
general, these programs were extraordinary bonuses –by early August, most of them had transferred cash benefits
one, two or three times– aimed at compensating for the temporary loss of income during the lockdown, as well as to
facilitate people staying in their homes. Although these programs have new names, target populations and payments
size, they were built on existing social information or payment methods.
Besides creating new interventions, LAC governments also increased the payment size of existing CTPs: 17
programs in 7 countries were vertically expanded. These responses implied increasing the size of the transfers
for people who were already beneficiaries. For example, Jamaica increased the payment size of PATH, an existing
CTP, to make up for the school meals that students stopped receiving when schools closed. This type of response
is administratively simple because the programs already had information of their beneficiary population in their
registries and had in place payment methods with which the population was used to.
In other cases, governments expanded programs horizontally, that is, they increased the coverage of existing CTPs.
This type of innovation was the least frequent (only three programs innovated in this way). The Bolsa Família program
in Brazil extended transfers to people who were already on the social registry (Cadastro Único), but who were not
yet beneficiaries as they were on the waiting list. Similarly, Guatemala doubled the number of older adults selected
monthly to begin receiving non-contributory pensions with the potential effect of protecting a group especially at
risk in the pandemic. Finally, Belize expanded the coverage of its CTP named Boost, by using the information of

8 The need to respond to the pandemic has made it clear that countries with broad coverage in their contributory social security systems have fewer people

in need and greater capacity to implement an intervention in response to the pandemic, and vice versa (Oxford Policy Management , 2015). The population
with contributory social security has guaranteed a protection floor that makes them less vulnerable to a drop in income and to lack of access to health due to
an emergency. In addition, this population has the possibility of being identified and targeted to receive new or better government social benefits, since they
are already in social security registries. For this reason, countries with low levels of coverage have a narrower margin —in administrative terms— to respond
quickly and effectively to the emergency, but a greater need to do so, since there is a greater proportion of their population whose income and general welfare are particularly vulnerable to the economic or sanitary crisis.

9 As explained before, those CTPs that continued to operate regularly, without any modification, were excluded from the analysis, as they cannot be consid-

ered part of the response to the pandemic.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

12

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

another program: their food assistance’s beneficiary registry. The three programs that expanded their coverage used
pre-existing information to register and select new beneficiaries, although in the Brazilian case additional online
mechanisms were adapted so those who were not in the social registry could also request the benefit.
Finally, some countries made only minor adaptations. Costa Rica and Mexico brought forward the delivery of cash
benefits of existing programs, without modifying coverage or payment size. Similarly, Trinidad and Tobago switched
in kind benefits (food) for cash transfers. This type of intervention used information from their beneficiary registries
and, except in the case of Trinidad and Tobago, used the same payment methods.
Table 3. Number of cash transfer programs in Latin America and the Caribbean to respond to COVID-19, by form of
innovation

Source: authors’ estimation and elaboration. The complete list of programs is in Table 4 and the compilation with all the variables is available at the online repository
(github.com/pCobosAlcala/CashTransfers_COVID19).

Coverage and payment size of CTPs
Beyond the number and type of innovation, to better understand policy responses, we need to assess coverage
among the target population and the size of the transfers. With very few exceptions, most of the interventions were
not very ambitious: they directly benefited less than 10% of the population with a total additional payment lower
than each country’s monthly minimum wage.
In Graphs 2 and 3, the horizontal axis represents coverage, understood as the number of direct beneficiaries
(households or individuals) divided by the total population of a country (The World Bank, 2020a).10 The vertical axis
shows the additional social benefits divided by the country’s monthly minimum wage in Graph 2 (International Labor
Organization, 2020) and by monthly GDP per capita in Graph 3 (The World Bank, 2020b).11
10 In the case of programs that had a horizontal expansion (that is, that expanded their coverage), only the number of people or households benefited due to
the pandemic is considered.
11 On the one hand, when programs were new, the amount reflected in the graph is equal to the total social benefit from April to early August. On the other
hand, when the programs expanded the number of benefited people or households (horizontal expansion), the transfer considered in the graph reflects the
social benefit received only by the new population. Finally, for the programs that increased the size of the transfers (vertical expansions), the graph only considers the amount added to the existing program. In all cases, when the social benefit depended on family composition or income level, the average transfer
was considered for the graph. The adaptation programs do not appear in the graph because they do not represent increases in coverage nor amounts.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

13

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Some emergency bonuses (newly created programs) were the most ambitious responses. The Auxílio Emergencial
program in Brazil is not only the intervention that in absolute terms had the largest number of direct beneficiaries
(80 million [Rubio et al., 2020]), and in which the number of these beneficiaries as a proportion of the population
represents a higher percentage (37%), but also in which the payment size was one of the highest (1.73 monthly
minimum wages) in the region. In contrast, Bolsa Família enrolled new beneficiaries who were on the waiting list (1.2
million families [Rubio et al., 2020]), but without modifying payment size (they paid the same amount of money that
was regularly delivered, which is equivalent to one third of the monthly minimum wage). This was possible because
Auxílio Emergencial is a temporary program, whereas Bolsa Família’s benefits to the newly enrolled population will
continue after the pandemic.
This situation is similar to what happened in Guatemala where –on the one hand– the government expanded
horizontally its non-contributory pension program (to a relatively small number of people), but –on the other hand–
implemented a new temporary program: an extraordinary bonus, higher than the monthly minimum wage, to a
larger number of people.
The programs with vertical expansions (those that increased the size of social benefits for people who were already
beneficiaries) did so with relatively low additional amounts of money. For example, Argentina used its universal
allowance programs (Asignación Universal por Embarazo and Asignación Universal por Hijo), which have broad
joint coverage (26% of the population) to transfer an additional but relatively small social benefit ($46 dollars, the
equivalent to 9.7% of the minimum wage [Rubio et al., 2020]). Conversely, Colombia and Suriname stand out for the
magnitude by which they increased the size of their program’s cash transfers. In the case of Colombia’s Jóvenes en
Acción it was of $98 additional dollars, delivered monthly during the state of emergency, and in Suriname’s children’s
allowance program, a 6-month cash benefit of $134 extra dollars (monthly delivered). However, both programs had
very limited coverage (296 thousand direct beneficiaries in Colombia and 45 thousand in Suriname (Directorate
National Security, 2020; Gobierno de Colombia, 2020; Vishmohanie, 2019)).
Finally, there were countries, like Mexico, Costa Rica and Trinidad and Tobago, that adapted their CTPs, but did
not increase the payments nor expand their coverage. The objective, in these cases, was to give families disposable
income during the pandemic.
In Graph 3, we present information similar to that of Graph 2, but with monthly GDP per capita as a reference to
compare the total additional payments’ size. In this graph, it is possible to include Caribbean countries (because there
is not comparable information regarding their minimum wage). The trends are similar to those of Graph 2: programs
are concentrated in the lower part of the graphs (transfer sizes are, for the most part, below 60% of monthly GDP per
capita) and it is evident that new programs are the ones that had the greatest coverage.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

14

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Graph 2. Proportion of direct beneficiaries and total additional benefits divided by monthly minimum wage in the
cash transfer programs in response to COVID-19

Graph 3. Proportion of direct beneficiaries and total additional benefits divided by monthly GDP per capita in the
cash transfer programs in response to COVID-19

Note 1 (calculations): the additional social benefits are the vertical expansions or new average benefits during the time that they were provided, for the programs
with information available for both axes. However, some programs mentioned that social benefits would be implemented for the duration of the state of emergency,
so we considered them as if they had lasted three months (one benefit per month).
Note 2 (calculations): coverage corresponds to the population benefited by the innovation.
Note 3 (calculations): in the case of the Asignación Universal por Embarazo and Asignación Universal por Hijo programs in Argentina, coverage is the sum of both
programs and they are represented as if they were a single program.
Note 4 (calculations): in the case of horizontal expansions, the social benefit is the usual payment, but only for the new incorporated population for a period of three
months.
Note 5 (interpretation): it is important to mention that any interpretation of these data should consider that the programs have different designs, in some cases
directed towards families and in others towards individuals, as well as universal or targeted approaches towards people who lost their income. The intention of Graphs
2 and 3, then, is to show an overview of the programs using similar metrics with the intention to have an understandable idea of LAC
​​
responses, without considering
the details of each one.
Note 6 (dates): GDP per capita is from 2019 (The World Bank, 2020b). The minimum wage dates are 2011 for Haiti; 2012 for Belize; 2013 for Costa Rica, Ecuador*, Guatemala*, Jamaica, Mexico*, Panama*, and Trinidad and Tobago; 2015 for the Dominican Republic* and Paraguay*; 2017 for Argentina* and Colombia*; 2018 for Brazil,
Chile*, Costa Rica*, El Salvador*, Peru* and Uruguay*; and 2019 for Bolivia* (International Labor Organization, 2020). The minimum wage information source for the
countries with an asterisk contained information in local currency, so the payments were converted to dollars in mid-October 2020.
Source: authors’ estimation and elaboration with data from the International Labour Organization (2020) and The World Bank Group (2020a, 2020b). The complete
compilation of the programs and information systems is available at the online repository (github.com/pCobosAlcala/CashTransfers_COVID19).

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

15

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

The different characteristics of these responses, shown in Graphs 2 and 3, reflect previous policy decisions,
regarding populations to be prioritized (as families in general, the poorest people or those who lost their job) and
policy objectives to be pursued (e.g., to cushion drop of income or to guarantee a minimum income). These decisions
respond to political priorities, but are also explained by the capacities of each country. For example, the decision on
the magnitude of programs’ vertical expansions depended on budgetary capacity, but the extent to which countries
expanded their programs and created new ones was facilitated by the information they already had to identify
and target beneficiaries. In the following section we describe how the different LAC governments used their social
information systems to respond to the pandemic.

The use of existing information to respond to the pandemic
Social protection information systems made it possible to quickly respond during an emergency where there
were few alternatives. The region’s social registries already contained information on 227 million people. While these
information systems did not guarantee effective responses, they did facilitate them. For example, those who have
been affected by the pandemic and are covered by social protection systems could be identified to receive new or
better social benefits, since they were already in the social information systems.
These social information systems had differences in their coverage, in the quality of their information and in their
interoperability with other registries, all of which affected their potential use. Based on available data and information
reported by national governments, we analyze these systems by identifying which social protection information
systems each country has and, then, how CTPs used them to respond to the pandemic (see Table 4).

Information systems for CTPs
We identified sixteen countries with social registries in LAC, twelve with single beneficiary registries and six with
systems that are interoperable with other sources of information (other than identity cards). Although not all countries
use their information systems for all their social assistance programs at all levels of government, they are common
in the region, particularly in the operation of social assistance programs with the highest coverage. Likewise, seven
social registries have a mixed mechanism for filling in the information: both active searches from the government and
on demand applications from potential beneficiaries.
Table 4. Ways in which CTPs used information systems to respond to COVID-19

Country

Argentina

Social protection
information system
prior to COVID-19

Social registry,
single beneficiary
registry and
interoperability

Program name

Type of innovation

Pre-existing information used for register, selection and transfer

Asignación Universal por
Embarazo

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Asignación Universal por
Hijo

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Ingreso Familiar de
Emergencia

New

Pre-existing information was not used

Pensión No Contributiva

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Tarjeta Alimentaria

New program

Registries of beneficiaries for registration and
selection

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

16

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Bahamas

-

Unemployment Assistance for COVID-19

New program

Pre-existing information was not used

Unemployment Programme for Self-Employed

New program

Pre-existing information was not used

Barbados

-

Vulnerable Family Survival
Programme

New program

Pre-existing information was not used

Belize

-

The Boost Programme

Horizontal expansion

Beneficiary registry for registration and selection

Bono Canasta Familiar

New program

Beneficiary registries for registration and selection

Bono Familia

New program

Social registry for register in the program and
selection

Bono Universal

New program

Financial and labor information for register, selection and payment

Auxílio Emergencial

New program

Social registry and beneficiary registries for register in the program, selection and payment

Bolsa Família

Horizontal expansion

Social registry for register in the program, selection and payment

Bono de Apoyo a los
Ingresos Familiares – Bono
COVID

New program

Social registry and contributory social security
information for register in the program, selection
and payment

Bono Independiente

New program

Fiscal information for selection and payment

Ingreso Familiar de
Emergencia (IFE)

New program

Social registry for selection and payment

Colombia Mayor

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Compensación del
Impuesto sobre las ventas
(IVA)

New program

Social registry for selection and payment

Familias en Acción

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Ingreso Solidario

New program

Social registry for register in the program,
selection and payment

Jóvenes en Acción

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Pensions’ payments
brought forward

Adaptation

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Bono Proteger

New program

Pre-existing information was not used

IMAS

New program

Social registry for register in the program,
selection and payment

Programa Pa’ Ti

New program

Contributory social security information and
beneficiary registries for register in the program,
selection and payment

Bolivia

Brazil

Chile

Colombia

Costa Rica

Social registry and
single beneficiary
registry

Social registry

Social registry,
single beneficiary
registry and
interoperability

Social registry

Social registry,
single beneficiary
registry and
interoperability

Dominican
Republic

Social registry and
single beneficiary
registry

Programa Quédate en
Casa

New program

Social registry for register in the program,
selection and payment

Ecuador

Social registry and
single beneficiary
registry

Bono de protección
familiar

New program

Social security information for selection and
payment

El Salvador

Social registry,
single beneficiary
registry and
interoperability

Programa de transferencias

New program

Pre-existing information was not used

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

17

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Guatemala

Haiti
Jamaica

Mexico

Panama

Paraguay

Peru

Saint Kitts and
Nevis

Suriname

-

Social registry
-

Social registry and
single beneficiary
registry

Social registry and
single beneficiary
registry

Social registry

Social registry,
single beneficiary
registry and
interoperability

-

-

Adulto Mayor

Horizontal
expansion

Conventional mechanisms of register and
payment

Apoyo al Comercio
Popular

New program

Municipal information of commerce for register
and selection

Bono Familia

New program

Electricity consumption information for selection

Transferencias monetarias

New program

Social registry for register in the program,
selection and payment

CARE

New program

Pre-existing information was not used

PATH

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Becas de Educación Básica
Bienestar para las Familias

Adaptation

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Beca Educación Media
Superior Benito Juárez

Adaptation

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Beca Educación Superior
Jóvenes Escribiendo el
Futuro

Adaptation

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Pensión para el Bienestar
de las Personas con
Discapacidad

Adaptation

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Pensión para el Bienestar
de los Adultos Mayores

Adaptation

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Panamá Solidario

New program

Labor and social security information for selection

Ñangareko (Programa de
Seguridad Alimentaria)

New program

Beneficiary registries, labor and social security
information for selection

Programa Pytyvõ
(Subsidio de Emergencia
Sanitaria)

New program

Beneficiary registries, labor and social security
information for selection

Tekoporã

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Bono Yo me quedo en
casa (Bono 280)

New program

Social registry for register in the program,
selection and payment

Bono Familiar Universal

New program

Social registry and beneficiary registries for
register in the program, selection and payment

Bono Independiente

New program

Social registry and beneficiary registries for
register in the program, selection and payment

Bono rural

New program

Social registry and beneficiary registries for
register in the program, selection and payment

COVID-19 Relief Fund

New program

Pre-existing information was not used

Financiële Bijstand
Mensen Met Een
Beperking

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Financiële Bijstand
Zwakke Huishoudens

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Algemene Kinderbijslag

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Algemene
Oudedagsvoorziening

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

18

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Trinidad and
Tobago

Uruguay

Venezuela

-

Social registry,
single beneficiary
registry and
interoperability

-

Disability Assistance
Grants

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Food Support

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Public Assistance

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Rental Assistance Grant

New program

Pre-existing information was not used

School Feeding
Programme

Adaptation

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Temporary Food Support
Card

New program

Pre-existing information was not used

Canasta de Emergencia

New program

Beneficiary registries and social security
information for selection

Plan de Equidad Social

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Uruguay Social

Vertical expansion

Beneficiary registry of the same program

Bono Disciplina y
Conciencia

New program

Social security information for selection and
payment

Bono Especial Quédate en
Casa – Sistema Patria

New program

Social security information for selection and
payment

Note (-): the dash indicates that there is no information on the portals of the countries to determine the answer.
Source: authors’ estimation and elaboration. The complete compilation of the programs and information systems is available at the online repository (github.com/
pCobosAlcala/CashTransfers_COVID19).

As shown in Table 2, LAC countries used social registries, (single) beneficiary registries, and other information
systems to target vulnerable people (enrolling them based on certain socioeconomic characteristics) or to avoid
duplications (reaching more people who were not receiving existing CTPs). Programs in Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador,
and Peru used them for the first purpose: they targeted vulnerable people, without necessarily excluding those
who were already beneficiaries of some program. In some other cases, such as Colombia, the Dominican Republic,
Peru, Panama and Paraguay, interventions used them to target beneficiaries, to avoid duplications and, except for
Paraguay, to automatically enroll and notify people of their new benefit. Finally, in Bolivia and Brazil, the new programs
used information from other beneficiary registries to generate a new registry of beneficiaries who were targeted to
receive an extraordinary benefit during the pandemic. In this sense, Brazil stands out because, through the Auxílio
Emergencial program, it had reached 59.3 million people by the end of May 2020, less than two months after being
launched (Blofield et al., 2020).
In other cases, existing registries had limited coverage, making it necessary for the programs to add new people
to them. Thus, some LAC countries have innovated in their intake and registration processes for identifying new
potentially eligible population. Caribbean countries such as the Bahamas, Barbados, Saint Kitts and Nevis, as well
as Trinidad and Tobago, took advantage of electronic mechanisms, such as emails or platforms, to implement ondemand registration processes. In the same vein, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay established
online platforms so that people could request their enrollment into the programs (or by phone for people who did not
have internet access). Once again, Brazil stands out: Auxílio Emergencial complemented the information from existing
registers with on-demand applications via online, telephone and face-to-face mechanisms, with 96 million applicants
registered by the end of May, of which 61% were accepted into the program (Blofield et al., 2020).
Social information systems were also used to deliver social benefits. Countries that already had people’s banking
information were able to transfer benefits more easily, through bank cards in which they already received some other
social benefit, or the accounts they had in social registries. This was the case in Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

19

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

the Dominican Republic, and Peru. Both Haiti and Uruguay used mobile apps to cash in benefits in certain places,12
whereas Guatemala sent codes to mobile phones to withdraw money at ATMs. Finally, Panama and Paraguay designed
mechanisms for cashing in the extraordinary social bonus in supermarkets through the information contained in their
national identity cards.
Social information systems have also been used to notify the beneficiaries of the transfer they would receive. Most
of the countries set up online platforms so that people could find out if they had been selected to receive social
benefits from a program, and even some, such as Colombia, Costa Rica and Paraguay, notify them by cell phone.
Graph 4 shows that the use of existing information was frequent for responding to the pandemic: 52 out of 64
programs used existing information to identify and select people, as well as to make payments (47 out of 64). All
vertical expansions (17), horizontal expansions (3), and adaptations (7) used existing information to identify and select
people and almost all programs used already existing payment methods (25 out of 27). This was administratively
viable because they are programs with operating processes already at work. Similarly, most of the new programs used
existing information to identify and determine who was eligible (25 out of 37), and pre-existing payment methods
to deliver the benefit (22 out of 37). Thus, although these were programs with new target populations, objectives
or structures, they built on previous efforts to systematize information and payment methods that facilitated their
implementation.
Graph 4. Use of existing information and payment methods by innovations in CTP

Source: authors’ estimation and elaboration. The complete list of programs is in Table 4 and the compilation with all the variables is available at the online repository
(github.com/pCobosAlcala/CashTransfers_COVID19).

Information systems’ quality: coverage and interoperability
In this section, we analyze the quality of information systems used by the CTPs implemented to respond to the
pandemic. To do so, Graph 5 shows, on the horizontal axis, the proportion of people whose information is included
in each country’s social registry –an indicator of the quality of social protection information systems–. The vertical
axis represents the sum of people or households that directly received cash transfers in each program divided by
each country’s population. This metric should not necessarily be interpreted as total program’s coverage because,
12 Although with major differences in terms of coverage (both due to the population’s connectivity limitations and the existence of administrative records with
people’s contact details), which allows a more limited scope in the case of Haiti.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

20

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

in some cases, people could be benefited from more than one program and, in others, programs were targeted to
households rather than individuals. Finally, the colors of the graph indicate the existence of the components of the
social protection information systems, while the type of figure (triangles or circles) shows whether a country used this
information system.
Graph 5. Use of information systems in response to COVID-19 and sum of direct beneficiaries divided by the
population of each country

Note 1 (countries without information): non-visualized LAC countries do not present information on CTPs with any new characteristics, their social benefits or coverage, nor the social protection information system. The information for Belize, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago only contains those of the programs with data in both
axes.
Note 2 (calculations): the vertical axis corresponds to the sum of direct beneficiaries for each program. If a program provided two or more payments, we only included
one. Population data is for mid-2019.
Note 3 (visualization): dotted lines represent the average for each axis.
Note 4 (sources): the components and data correspond to those reported by each country.
Note 5 (interpretation): any interpretation of these data must consider that the programs have different designs, in some cases directed towards families and in others
towards individuals, as well as universal or focused approaches towards people who lost their income. The purpose of Graph 4, then, is to show an overview of the
programs using similar metrics in order to have a basic understanding of LAC responses, without considering the details of each one.
Source: authors’ estimation and elaboration with data from The World Bank Group (2020a). The complete compilation of the programs and information systems is
available at the online repository (github.com/pCobosAlcala/CashTransfers_COVID19).

As seen in Graph 5, in the upper-right quadrant there are countries with an above-average proportion of the
population in the social registry and of direct beneficiaries divided by the population. Chile –with one of the best social
protection information systems in the region– managed to reach a relatively high number of direct beneficiaries with
information it already had about them. This was also the case in Brazil, Colombia, and Peru, that used social registries
with good coverage for targeting or for vertically expanding the existing CTPs. Bolivia, with a social registry with an
average coverage, reached the highest proportion of its population with three new programs. Moreover, its single
beneficiary registry allowed it to use the information of people who already received a benefit to respond with the
Bono Canasta Familiar program.
Countries with below-average social registry coverage, but with above-average proportion of direct beneficiaries
divided by the population are in the upper-left quadrant. Among them, two stand out –Argentina and Paraguay–,
which have the three components of social protection information systems: a social registry, a single beneficiary
registry and interoperability with other sources of information. These countries responded with both new programs
and vertical expansions. In contrast, despite not having robust social protection information systems, Suriname
responded with vertical expansion of existing programs, and Saint Kitts and Nevis with a relatively ambitious new
program.13
13 Saint Kitts and Nevis is the country with the smallest population among those studied in this article.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

21

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

In the lower left quadrant are the countries that had social registries with low coverage and a low proportion of
direct beneficiaries. Most of these countries (mostly also in the Caribbean) do not have developed social protection
information systems. However, some of them, such as Jamaica and Guatemala, reached a proportion of direct
beneficiaries similar to El Salvador, a country with the three components of social protection information systems.
In this quadrant, Mexico stands out because, despite having a single beneficiary registry and a social registry,14 it
was one of the few LAC countries that did not expand or create a new CTP, limiting its response to bringing forward
payments for five existing programs.
Finally, the lower-right quadrant shows countries with above-average social registry coverage, but relatively fewer
direct beneficiaries. There are two groups in this quadrant. The first, Honduras and Ecuador, had a limited response
(without cash transfers in Honduras), despite having certain elements of their social protection information systems
that would have facilitated this type of programs. The second group –Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic and
Uruguay– has below-average direct beneficiaries with very good social protection information systems, although
they are also countries with general good indicators of social protection, which may explain why they did not rely
heavily on CTPs.
Yet it is necessary to analyze these interventions in context; not only as part of each country’s budget, but also in
how timely and sufficient the individual transfers were to compensate for the income losses caused by the pandemic
(for a study that addresses this point for ten Latin American countries, see Blofield et al., 2020). Furthermore, it will be
necessary to assess their effects on poverty, inequality, or social mobility. Although it is soon to determine such effects,
it is expected that these variations will partly explain differences in their capacity to offset the drop of households’
income (Lustig et al., 2020).
Social protection information systems have facilitated rapid responses through monetary transfers, but there are
other variables that limited how governments implemented extraordinary measures in the pandemic: fiscal capacity,
digital divide or banking penetration and, in general, legal and administrative constraints for the expeditious
execution of innovative measures. However, it is clear that any ambitious CTP in response to any emergency becomes
more feasible when governments have integrated, up-to-date, and good quality social information systems.

Conclusions
Facing the unforeseen, massive, and diverse social and economic effects of the shock generated by COVID-19,
governments around the world have built, adapted and scaled-up their policy interventions. Governments in LAC
have used social protection instruments to cushion the social and economic effects of the pandemic: they have used
CTPs as a vehicle to reach the vulnerable population, and for this they have used their social protection information
systems to identify or enroll people who should be benefited. The quality and usefulness of these instruments varies
between countries, as not all have complete and updated social information systems, nor were they able to deploy
them to deal with the pandemic. As Blofield et al. (2020) explain, once governments decided to act, some of them
faced delays due to not having updated information or agile enrollment mechanisms.
Most countries showed innovation capacity to respond to the pandemic. Forms of innovation varied across LAC,
but emergency bonuses were the most frequent measure: 21 countries responded with 37 new CTPs. However, the
number of responses is not equivalent to the programs’ sufficiency: it is also important to know coverage rates and
size of the payments to estimate whether they were adequate. In this regard, more than half of the programs for
14 For this article, we consider the new social registry of the Government of Mexico (Censo del Bienestar) and the single beneficiary registry that reports in its
official portal (Gobierno de México, n.d.-a, n.d.-b, n.d.-c).

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

22

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

which information is available did not directly benefit more than 10% of the population and did so with lower total
additional benefits than a minimum wage (or less than 60% of the monthly GDP per capita for countries with noncomparable minimum wages).
The pandemic has highlighted the importance of having information systems in place for implementing programs
in a swift way: almost all vertical expansions, horizontal expansions and adaptations were supported by pre-existing
information to identify, enroll or deliver social benefits to the population. The major finding, however, is that also the
new programs used existing information: 25 out of 37 programs used it to identify and enroll people, while 22 of them
used on-going payment methods. This pre-existing information, contained in social protection information systems,
is a very useful tool: social registries in the region have socioeconomic information on 227 million people, which is a
key input for any intervention.
Social information systems and, in general, CTPs are relevant even beyond the pandemic. LAC countries have three
tasks in this regard in the coming years. The first task is to consolidate good social protection information systems:
with broader coverage, updating mechanisms, and more complete and interoperable information. In a context of
social protection models based on a mix of contributory and non-contributory schemes, integrating information is
the only way to track people, thus being able to protect them when they lose their jobs or migrate from a formal into
an informal one, and vice versa.
Furthermore, these systems must have more complete information about the population –including georeferenced
data–, as this gives greater flexibility for program design and implementation. In some countries (such as Brazil or
Chile) the already available information showed the enormous potential of information systems to enable decisionmaking, to identify populations, and to deliver payments. In others, as in many Caribbean countries, the pandemic
forced decisions to be made with new information, which may become the starting point for the development of
solid information systems in the coming years. In sum, the availability and quality of information systems will broaden
governments’ capacities –both for the day-to-day operation of programs, and for innovations generated by new social
protection policies or by unforeseen problems that require swift responses–.
The second task is to promote that this information is effectively used to design, implement, and evaluate public
policies. As more government programs and agencies value social information systems, their updating will be a
shared task and more actors will collaborate and monitor their proper functioning. This is not up to a single ministry,
agency or level of government; it is a shared responsibility for all those involved in the provision of social protection
to achieve the interoperability of existing information to facilitate decision-making. Of course, it is not just a matter of
making information available, but of taking advantage of it in policymaking.
The use of these systems may be fostered by making compulsory their use for programs to select beneficiaries,
as it may be a starting point for coordination processes for integral responses. These systems could also reduce
administrative burdens for both bureaucracy and citizens by integrating information and preventing two agencies
from requiring similar information from citizens. Ideally, these systems would also allow agencies to coordinate with
each other to track beneficiaries through their life cycle, to complement efforts, or to use single payment methods.
The third task refers to rethinking the role of CTPs as part of social protection systems. These programs have been
crucial in cushioning the economic effects of the pandemic on the most vulnerable population. However, these
programs should be more than instruments to deliver money to a certain population; the effectiveness of CTPs
depends on their specific design attributes: therefore, specific decisions about the size of the benefits, periodicity
of the transfers or payment methods, among others, will have differentiated effects on people (Bastagli et al., 2016).

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

23

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

It also implies placing cash transfers –conditional or not– as only one of the many possible social protection
interventions to face risks on health and income. Indeed, CTPs should be understood as temporary responses to the
crises derived from the pandemic, and not as substitutes for comprehensive social protection systems. Developing
these systems remains a challenge in LAC countries. It will not be possible to build solid social protection systems
in the region if they are based only on CTPs. The next unavoidable discussion will be the financing of these systems,
since the ambitious CTPs promoted in some LAC countries are not financially viable for longer periods, unless there
are significant fiscal reforms.
The LAC region has been severely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. This phenomenon has shown the diversity of
progress among these countries in reducing poverty, inequalities, vulnerability, as well as the different administrative
capacities to respond to new adversities. Although some of the responses and tools used by governments in the
face of the pandemic make it possible to find elements that work –such as social registries and payment methods–
and others that need to be improved –such as quality of information and scope of the responses–, the pandemic
should also serve to reinvigorate the discussion on developing comprehensive social protection systems that have
the capacity to benefit all people according to their specific conditions –regardless of their employment– and to react
to changes in their life cycle and their employment status.

References
Barca, V. (2017). Integrating Data and Information Management for Social Protection: Social Registries and Integrated Beneficiary Registries.
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Commonwealth of Australia. www.dfat.gov.au/about-us/publications/Pages/integrating-datainformation-management-social-protection
Barca, V. (2018). Information Systems for Social Protection: What Is All the Fuss? Social Protection. socialprotection.org/discover/blog/informationsystems-social-protection-what-all-fuss
Barca, V., & O’Brien, C. (2017). Factors Affecting the Usefulness of Existing Social Protection Databases in Disaster Preparedness and Response.
Shock Responsive Social Protection Research. assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a942c50ed915d57d4d0ef98/Policy-Brief-Factorsaffecting-usefulness-existing-social-protection-databases.pdf
Bastagli, F., Hagen-Zanker, J., Harman, L., Barca, V., Sturge, G., & Pellerano, L. (2016) Cash transfers: what does the evidence say? A rigorous review
of programme impact and of the role of design and implementation features. Overseas Development Institute, www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/
files/resource-documents/11316.pdf
Beazley, R., Solórzano, A., & Barca, V. (2019). Protección social reactiva frente a emergencias en América Latina y el Caribe. Oxford Policy
Management Limited. www.opml.co.uk/files/Publications/a1537-shock-responsive-social-protection-latin-america-caribbean/hallazgosprincipals-y-recomendaciones.pdf?noredirect=1
Blofield, M., Giambruno, C., & Filgueira, F. (2020). Policy expansion in compressed time: Assessing the speed, breadth and sufficiency of postCOVID-19 social protection measures in 10 Latin American countries (N°.235; Social Policy). ECLAC.
Cecchini, S., Filgueira, F., Martínez, R. & Rossel, C. (2015). Towards Universal Social Protection. Latin American Pathways and Policy Tools. ECLAC:
Santiago, ssrn.com/abstract=2699403
Chirchir, R., & Farooq, S. (2016). Single Registries and Social Registries: Clarifying the Terminological Confusion. Development Pathways, 23, 8.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

24

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Chudnovsky, M., & Peeters, R. (2019). Más allá de la focalización de la política pública: incidencia de factores extraorganizacionales en la falta
de cobertura de ciudadanos elegibles en la asignación universal por hijo en Argentina. Estado, Gobierno y Gestión Pública, (33), pp. 5–37.
doi:10.5354/0717-8980.2020.56465
Directorate National Security. (2020). COVID-19 Noodfonds in uitvoering: Aanvang uitbetaling AKB, AOV, Financiële Bijstand en Pensioen. COVID
SURINAME. covid-19.sr/covid-19-noodfonds-in-uitvoering-aanvang-uitbetaling-akb-aov-financiele-bijstand-en-pensioen/
ECLAC (2020a). COVID-19 Observatory for Latin America and the Caribbean: Measures by Country. eclac.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.
html?appid=57c96de0159641b095bd1c213c320ab9
ECLAC (2020b). Non-contributory Social Protection Programmes Database. Latin America and the Caribbean. United Nations. dds.cepal.org/
bpsnc/ptc
ECLAC (2020c). Non-contributory Social Protection Programmes Database. Latin America and the Caribbean. United Nations. dds.cepal.org/
bpsnc/ps
Gentilini, U., Almenfi, M., Orton, I., & Dale, P. (2020). Social Protection and Jobs Responses to COVID-19: A Real-Time Review of Country Measures.
World Bank. openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33635
Gobierno de Colombia. (2020, May 17). Inició 2da entrega de ayudas sociales a Jóvenes en Acción. Prosperidad Social. prosperidadsocial.gov.co/Notic
ias/%e2%80%8b%e2%80%8binicio-la-segunda-entrega-de-ayudas-sociales-a-jovenes-en-accion-en-el-marco-de-la-emergencia-por-covid-19
Gobierno de México. (n.d.-a). Padrón Único de Beneficiarios. Retrieved September 6, 2020, from pub.bienestar.gob.mx/pub
Gobierno de México. (n.d.-b). Estrategia y metodología: Censo del Bienestar. Retrieved September 6, 2020, from www.gob.mx/cms/uploads/
attachment/file/552532/CENSO_DEL_BIENESTAR_19_05_2020_hapf.pdf
Gobierno de México. (n.d.-c). Resultados del Censo del Bienestar. Retrieved September 6, 2020, from www.gob.mx/cms/uploads/attachment/
file/552529/Resultados_del_Censo_del_Bienestar.pdf
Leite, P., Karippacheril, T. G., Sun, C., Jones, T., & Lindert, K. (2017). Social Registries for Social Assistance and Beyond: A Guidance Note
y Assessment Tool (Discussion Paper N.o 1704; Social Protection and Labor, p. 119). World Bank. documents1.worldbank.org/curated/
en/698441502095248081/pdf/117971-REVISED-PUBLIC-Discussion-paper-1704.pdf#page=51
Lindert, K., Karippacheril, T., Nishikawa, K., & Rodríguez, I. (2020). Sourcebook on the Foundations of Social Protection Delivery Systems (K. Lindert,
T. G. Karippacheril, I. R. Caillava, y K. N. Chávez, Eds.). International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank. openknowledge.
worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/34044/9781464815775.pdf?sequence=8yisAllowed=y
Lodge, M., & K. Wegrich (eds.) (2014). The Problem-Solving Capacity of the Modern State: Governance Challenges and Administrative Capacities.
Oxford University Press.
López-Calva, L. F. (2020, september 3). Inclusion requires capacity: The role of social registries in expanding cash transfers in the wake of
COVID-19. UNDP. www.latinamerica.undp.org/content/rblac/en/home/presscenter/director-s-graph-for-thought/inclusion-requires-capacity--the-role-of-social-registries-in-e.html
Lustig, N., V. Martínez, F. Sanz, & S. Younger (2020). The impact of COVID-19 lockdowns and expanded social assistance on inequality, poverty and
mobility in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Mexico. Tulane University, CEQ Institute.

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

25

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean

#COVID19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

Moynihan, D. P., & Herd, P. (2010). Red Tape and Democracy: How Rules Affect Citizenship Rights. American Review of Public Administration. 40(6),
654–70.
Organización Internacional del Trabajo. (2014). La Estrategia de Desarrollo de los Sistemas de Seguridad Social de la OIT. El Papel de los Pisos de
Protección Social en América Latina y el Caribe. Organización Internacional del Trabajo. www.ilo.org/americas/publicaciones/WCMS_317898/
lang--es/index.htm
Oxford Policy Management. (2015). Shock-Responsive Social Protection Systems Research. Working Paper 1: Conceptualising Shock-Responsive
Social Protection. Oxford Policy Management. www.opml.co.uk/files/Publications/a0408-shock-responsive-social-protection-systems/wp1-srspconcept-note.pdf?noredirect=1
Rubio, M., Escaroz, G., Machado, A., Palomo, N., & Sato, L. (2020). Protección social y respuesta al COVID-19 en América Latina y el Caribe. II Edición:
Asistencia social. Social Protection, 53.
The World Bank Group. (2020a). Population, total | Data. data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?locations=
The World Bank Group. (2020b). GDP per capita (current US$) | Data. data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD
United Nations. (2018). Promoting Inclusion Through Social Protection. Report on the World Social Situation 2018. www.un.org/development/
desa/dspd/wp-content/uploads/sites/22/2018/06/rwss2018-full-advanced-copy.pdf
Vishmohanie, T. (2020, may 13). COVID-19 steun is geen permanente verhoging. Suriname Herald. www.srherald.com/suriname/2020/05/13/
covid-19-steun-is-geen-permanente-verhoging/

www.latinamerica.undp.org | United Nations Development Programme | 2020

26

UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean
COVID 19 | POLICY DOCUMENTS SERIES

www.latinamerica.undp.org

We acknowledge the kind support of the Spanish Cooperation.

