How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work:
Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Keetie Roelen, Stephen Devereux, Abdul-Gafaru Abdulai,
Bruno Martorano, Tia Palermo and Luigi Peter Ragno

Office of Research - Innocenti Working Paper
WP-2017-10 | August 2017

1

INNOCENTI WORKING PAPERS
UNICEF Office of Research Working Papers are intended to disseminate initial research contributions within
the programme of work, addressing social, economic and institutional aspects of the realization of the human
rights of children.
The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the policies or views of UNICEF.
This paper has been peer reviewed both externally and within UNICEF.
The text has not been edited to official publications standards and UNICEF accepts no responsibility for
errors.
Extracts from this publication may be freely reproduced with due acknowledgement. Requests to utilize larger
portions or the full publication should be addressed to the Communication Unit at: florence@unicef.org.

For readers wishing to cite this document, we suggest the following form:
Keetie Roelen, Stephen Devereux, Abdul-Gafaru Abdulai, Bruno Martorano, Tia Palermo and Luigi Peter
Ragno (2017). How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors, Innocenti
Working Paper 2017-10, UNICEF Office of Research, Florence.

© 2017 United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
eISSN: 2520-6796

2

THE UNICEF OFFICE OF RESEARCH – INNOCENTI
The Office of Research – Innocenti is UNICEF’s dedicated research centre. It undertakes research
on emerging or current issues in order to inform the strategic directions, policies and programmes
of UNICEF and its partners, shape global debates on child rights and development, and inform the
global research and policy agenda for all children, and particularly for the most vulnerable.
Publications produced by the Office are contributions to a global debate on children and may not
necessarily reflect UNICEF policies or approaches. The views expressed are those of the authors.
The Office of Research – Innocenti receives financial support from the Government of Italy, while
funding for specific projects is also provided by other governments, international institutions and
private sources, including UNICEF National Committees.
For further information and to download or order this and other publications, please visit the
website at: www.unicef-irc.org.

Correspondence should be addressed to:
UNICEF Office of Research - Innocenti
Piazza SS. Annunziata, 12
50122 Florence, Italy
Tel: (+39) 055 20 330
Fax: (+39) 055 2033 220
florence@unicef.org
www.unicef-irc.org
twitter: @UNICEFInnocenti
facebook.com/UnicefOfficeofResearchInnocenti

3

HOW TO MAKE ‘CASH PLUS’ WORK:
LINKING CASH TRANSFERS TO SERVICES AND SECTORS
Keetie Roelen1, Stephen Devereux2, Abdul-Gafaru Abdulai3, Bruno Martorano4, Tia Palermo5
and Luigi Peter Ragno6

1

Research Fellow and Co-Director of the Centre for Social Protection, Institute of Development Studies

2

Research Fellow, Institute of Development Studies

3

Senior Lecturer, Department of Public Administration and Health Services Management,
University of Ghana Business School

4

Postdoctoral Fellow, Institute of Development Studies

5

Social Policy Specialist, UNICEF Office of Research - Innocenti

6

Chief, Social Policy, UNICEF Egypt (with UNICEF Ghana at time of writing)

Corresponding author is: K.Roelen@ids.ac.uk

Abstract: The broad-ranging benefits of cash transfers are now widely recognized. However, the evidence
base highlights that they often fall short in achieving longer-term and second-order impacts related to
nutrition, learning outcomes and morbidity. In recognition of these limitations, several ‘cash plus’ initiatives
have been introduced, whereby cash transfers are combined with one or more types of complementary
support. This paper aims to identify key factors for successful implementation of these increasingly popular
‘cash plus’ programmes, based on (i) a review of the emerging evidence base of ‘cash plus’ interventions
and (ii) an examination of three case studies, namely, Chile Solidario in Chile, IN-SCT in Ethiopia and LEAP
in Ghana. The analysis was guided by a conceptual framework proposing a menu of ‘cash plus’ components.
The assessment of three case studies indicated that effective implementation of ‘cash plus’ components has
indeed contributed to greater impacts of the respective programmes. Such initiatives have thereby addressed
some of the non-financial and structural barriers that poor people face and have reinforced the positive
effects of cash transfer programmes. In design of such programmes, further attention should be paid to the
constraints faced by the most vulnerable and how such constraints can be overcome. We conclude with
recommendations regarding the provision of complementary support and cross-sectoral linkages based on
lessons learned from the case studies. More research is still needed on the impact of the many variations of
‘cash plus’ programming, including evidence on the comparative roles of individual ‘plus’ components, as
well as the knowledge, attitudes and behaviour pathways which influence these impacts.
Keywords: Social protection, cash transfers, cash plus, linkages
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank Rebecca Holmes, Carol Watson, and an anonymous
reviewer for their useful insights and review of this paper.

4

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................................... 6
‘CASH PLUS’ PROGRAMMING: STRENGTHENING IMPACTS ON SECOND-ORDER
OUTCOMES.......................................................................................................................................... 7
The rationale for ‘cash plus’ programming................................................................................... 7
Options for ‘cash plus’ programming............................................................................................ 8
Integral programme components................................................................................................ 10
Linkages to external support........................................................................................................ 11
GHANA: LIVELIHOODS EMPOWEREMENT AGAINST POVERTY (LEAP) PROGRAMME............. 13
Background and programme description.................................................................................... 13
‘Cash plus’ components................................................................................................................ 14
Explaining success........................................................................................................................ 15
Lessons learned............................................................................................................................. 18
CHILE SOLIDARIO.............................................................................................................................. 18
Background and programme description.................................................................................... 18
‘Cash plus’ components................................................................................................................ 20
Explaining success........................................................................................................................ 22
Lessons learned............................................................................................................................. 23
ETHIOPIA: INTEGRATED NUTRITION SOCIAL CASH TRANSFER (IN-SCT) PILOT....................... 24
Background and programme description.................................................................................... 24
‘Cash plus’ components................................................................................................................ 25
Explaining success........................................................................................................................ 27
Lessons learned............................................................................................................................. 28
CRITERIA FOR SUCCESS AND CHALLENGES AHEAD................................................................... 28
Politics matter................................................................................................................................ 29
Formal agreements are a necessary foundation........................................................................ 29
Awareness and engagement of all stakeholders is imperative for coordination..................... 30
Personalized approaches require a skilled workforce and ‘the right person in the
right place’..................................................................................................................................... 30
Establishment of linkages to services across sectors requires case management................. 31
Greater ambitions need to be matched with greater resources................................................ 31
Demand-side interventions needs to be matched with supply-side investments................... 32
‘Cash plus’ components need to be fit-for-purpose................................................................... 32
CONCLUSION..................................................................................................................................... 33
REFERENCES: GENERAL................................................................................................................... 35
REFERENCES: GHANA...................................................................................................................... 39
REFERENCES: CHILE......................................................................................................................... 40
REFERENCES: ETHIOPIA................................................................................................................... 41

5

Children and the Data Cycle: Rights and Ethics in a Big Data World
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-05

INTRODUCTION
It is now widely recognised and evidenced that cash transfers can have highly positive socio-economic
impacts, ranging from poverty reduction and improved living conditions to enhanced psycho-social
well-being. At the same time, the expanding evidence base also highlights that the provision of cash
alone falls short in achieving long-term second-order impacts such as those related to nutrition,
learning outcomes and morbidity (Attah et al. 2016; Bastagli et al. 2016). This holds true across the
spectrum of social protection interventions, from child grants seeking to improve children’s nutritional
outcomes to graduation programmes designed to promote household asset accumulation and income
generation. The term ‘cash plus’ is gaining considerable traction because of its potential to
complement cash with additional inputs, service components or linkages to external services, that, in
combination, may be more effective in achieving the desired impacts and ensuring their sustainability
than cash alone (Watson and Palermo, 2016).
The theory of change of ‘cash plus’ programming is predicated on the notion that, while cash transfers
can have impacts beyond their poverty-alleviation objectives, the ‘income effect’ of cash transfers can
be constrained by behavioural mediators or broader moderators (Palermo, Veras Soares and Yablonski,
2017). For example, cash transfer programmes alone may not prompt sufficient behavioural change
(‘mediators’) to reach impacts in areas such as nutrition, education and health1. Further, cash alone
may not achieve positive outcomes when beneficiaries experience exclusion from quality health
facilities, schools, markets, or other services (access and supply-side constraints, or impact
‘moderators’), or in the face of shocks. Indeed, this concept of exclusion is recognized in the definition
of ‘transformative social protection’ emphasising the importance of addressing structural inequalities
and barriers to inclusion (Devereux and Sabates-Wheeler, 2004).
‘Cash plus’ programmes can be characterized as social protection interventions that provide regular
transfers in combination with additional components or linkages that seek to augment income effects.
This is done either by inducing further behavioural changes or by addressing supply-side constraints.
Options for so doing include the provision of information (such as through behaviour change
communication [BCC] or sensitization meetings), provision of additional benefits and support (such as
supplementary feeding or psycho-social support), provision or facilitation of access to services (such as
through health insurance or setting up Village Savings and Loans Associations) or implementation of
case management (ensuring referrals to other sectors), or strengthening the quality of existing services
and facilitating linkages to these. While the need for programmes to move beyond ‘cash only’ has been
increasingly recognised in making social protection truly transformative (Molyneux et al. 2016),
relatively little is known about how these linkages can be successfully established and implemented.
This paper seeks to identify criteria for success and considers challenges in the creation and delivery of
such programmes, with a focus on sectors related to health, nutrition and education. It aims to provide
recommendations for more integrated service provision as part of (or linked to) social protection
programming. It does so by (i) reviewing the emerging evidence base assessing the impact of ‘cash
plus’ versus cash alone and (ii) examining case studies in three countries – the Livelihoods

1

This review focuses on nutrition, education and health. For a comprehensive review of ‘cash plus’ programming related to
agricultural interventions, see Soares F. V. , Knowles M, Daidone S, Tirivayi N (2017). Combined effects and synergies between
agricultural and social protection interventions: What is the evidence so far? Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations: Rome.

6

Children and the Data Cycle: Rights and Ethics in a Big Data World
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-05

Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP) programme in Ghana, the Chile Solidario scheme in Chile, and
the Integrated Nutrition Social Cash Transfer (IN-SCT) pilot project in Ethiopia. As such, this paper
contributes to an increased understanding of how social protection interventions can enhance inclusion
by steering basic services towards those most excluded in society. This improved understanding of
successful strategies and lessons learned could help policymakers and implementers to improve
linkages and take steps towards integrated systems.
This paper is structured as follows: Firstly, we discuss the rationale and options for ‘cash plus’
programming, suggesting a ‘menu’ of ‘plus’ components. Secondly, we discuss each case study in
detail, including programme descriptions, discussions of ‘cash plus’ components, assessing success
and challenges and identifying lessons learned. We subsequently identify common factors for success
as well as challenges for the establishment and delivery of ‘cash plus’ programmes, before offering
final conclusions.

1. ‘CASH PLUS’ PROGRAMMING: STRENGTHENING IMPACTS ON SECOND-ORDER
OUTCOMES
This section provides the rationale for ‘cash plus’ programming and discusses options for design and
implementation of these interventions, elaborating various options in a menu of ‘plus’ components. We
build on existing frameworks and evidence from low- and middle-income countries.

1.1. The rationale for ‘cash plus’ programming
Cash transfer programmes have been shown to reduce poverty and improve well-being across a range
of dimensions, including food security, health, schooling, child protection, productive activities, and
safe transitions to adulthood (Baird, Ferreira, Özler et al. 2013; Bastagli et al. 2016; Davis et al. 2016; De
Hoop and Rosati, 2013; FAO, 2015; Lagarde, Haines,and Palmer, 2007; Roelen, 2014). Households may
face budget constraints that limit their ability to buy food, send children to school and seek healthcare,
even if they value these activities and would prefer to carry them out. Relatedly, households may face
liquidity constraints which prohibit them from investing in agricultural inputs or businesses to increase
their productive capacity (Veras Soares, Knowles, Daidone, & Tirivayi, 2016). Regular cash payments
can alleviate these budget and liquidity constraints and help households to smooth consumption, for
example, during lean seasons. Indeed, cash transfer programmes have proved to be crucial for the
achievement of positive outcomes.
Notwithstanding these positive effects, cash alone cannot alleviate non-financial and structural barriers
to improving living standards and well-being. With respect to education, cash transfers have widely
been found to improve school attendance but appear to have a limited effect on learning outcomes
(Bastagli et al. 2016). Child nutrition is an area in which evidence of cash transfer impacts is notoriously
mixed (Manley, Gitter and Slavchevska, 2013), suggesting that barriers other than lack of cash –
including inadequate knowledge of feeding practices or lack of access to clean water – undermine
children’s nutritional outcomes. Investments in productive capacity may be hampered by structural
constraints such as lack of access to services, markets, and insurance (Veras Soares et al. 2016).
Integration of cash transfer programmes with other interventions or services including the creation of
linkages between demand-side and supply-side interventions has the potential to improve impacts in
many areas of people’s lives (and conversely, cash transfers may not have impacts among those

7

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

facing exclusion from quality services). Existing evidence illustrates how access to services enhances
the impacts of cash transfer programmes. For instance, Zambia’s Child Grant Programme (CGP) was
found to improve skilled birth attendance – but only among women living in communities with higher
quality health services (Handa, Peterman, Seidenfeld, & Tembo, 2016), and to reduce stunting among
households with a protected water source (Seidenfeld et al. 2014). In Niger, Langendorf et al. (2014)
identified a higher rate of reduction of acute malnutrition among households that received cash plus
access to nutritional supplements, compared to households that received cash or supplementary
food.
In circumstances where sub-optimal outcomes occur due to lack of knowledge (i.e. inaccurate or
insufficient information), the provision of information or creation of awareness may be needed. In Latin
America, Mexico’s Oportunidades programme is estimated to have increased family planning use
among women aged 20 to 24 years, most likely through the required health/information sessions
(Lamadrid-Figueroa et al. 2010). In Bangladesh, a pilot project titled ‘The Transfer Modality Research
Initiative’ (TMRI) tested five transfer options: cash; food; cash plus food; food plus nutrition behavioural
change communication (BCC); and cash plus nutrition BCC. The objective was to identify which transfer
or combination of transfers would have the biggest positive impact on child nutrition. A rigorous
evaluation found that only one of the five options – cash plus nutrition BCC – achieved a statistically
significant reduction in child malnutrition rates (Ahmed et al. 2016), which underscores the importance
of adding messaging to cash transfer programmes.
Experimental evidence from Liberia highlights how intense counselling and support can improve the
sustainability of impacts. In an experiment aiming to reduce violence and crime among men who were
previously engaged in criminal activities, the combination of cash transfers plus cognitive behavioural
therapy was found to significantly improve the long-term reduction in crime and violence. While crime and
violence were reduced among all men receiving either cash alone, therapy alone or cash and therapy
combined, the result was only maintained for those who received the combination of support (Blattman et
al. 2017).

1.2. Options for ‘cash plus’ programming
Watson and Palermo (2016: 5-6) refer to ‘cash plus’ programmes as “[…] the programme option of
combining cash transfers with other sorts of support. The rationale is that cash alone is not always
sufficient as a means to reduce the broad-based and interrelated social and economic risks and
vulnerabilities that the targeted beneficiary populations face, and that additional support is needed”.
The types and combinations of ‘other sorts of support’ can take many forms and can be integrated with
cash transfers in different ways. We consider existing typologies of programmes offering integrated
packages of support before providing our own understanding of ‘cash plus’ programming.
In aiming to classify social protection programmes across a continuum of service delivery, Barrientos
et al. (2014) distinguish between (i) pure income transfers, (ii) income transfers combined with asset
accumulation, and (iii) integrated poverty reduction programmes. The second and third categories can
be considered ‘cash plus’ interventions, given their complementary components. Their rationale is
based on the premise that poverty is broader than a mere deficit in income or consumption, but also
represents deficits in productive assets and human capital and can be characterized by social exclusion
(ibid). Income transfers combined with asset accumulation include programmes that aim to build
physical assets and infrastructure, most notably public works programmes and programmes that focus
on human capital – primarily conditional cash transfers. Integrated poverty reduction programmes can

8

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

be considered most holistic in their approach and particularly aim to address the issue of social
exclusion by linking programme participants to a wide range of services.
‘Graduation programmes’ also represent a type of ‘cash plus’ intervention that has gained prominence
recently. Pioneered by BRAC in Bangladesh, the graduation model transfers a package of assistance to
extremely poor households over a two-year period. The package includes regular cash transfers, access
to savings, productive assets, livelihood training and behaviour change communication. Following
BRAC’s success with its graduation programme, pilot projects were launched in eight other countries.
Randomized control trials reported similarly positive results, not only in terms of graduating out of
extreme poverty but on a range of indicators such as asset ownership, food security and financial
inclusion. Moreover, most of these gains were sustained one year after programme support ended
(Banerjee et al. 2015).
While a conceptualisation of ‘cash plus’ interventions from simple to more complex programming is
appealing, variations of additional forms of support and the ways in which they are combined to
complement cash transfers do not lend themselves to such a categorisation. For example, a scheme
that complements cash transfers with the provision of health insurance cards and awareness raising by
extension workers may be comparable to an intervention linking cash transfers to the use of health
services through the use of conditions in terms of level of complexity. Yet, their ‘cash plus’ components
are very different indeed.
We conceptualize ‘cash plus’ programmes as follows:
’Cash plus’ interventions combine cash transfers with one or more types of
complementary support. Types of complementary support can consist of (i) components
that are provided as integral elements of the cash transfer intervention, such as through
the provision of additional benefits or in-kind transfers, information or behaviour change
communication (BCC), or psycho-social support, and (ii) components that are external to
the intervention but offer explicit linkages into services provided by other sectors, such as
through direct provision of access to services, or facilitating linkages to services.
The options for ‘cash plus’ components, both integral and external to the specific cash transfer
intervention, can be captured in a menu of ‘cash plus’ components (see Figure 1). The proposed
components are not mutually exclusive and can be combined in various ways depending on scope and
objectives. For example, programmes can seek to promote nutrition and health outcomes through a
combination of supplementary feeding, BCC, the provision of health insurance cards and by making
explicit referrals to health services. This menu of options suggests that ‘cash plus’ programmes need
not develop on a progressive scale of comprehensiveness in terms of the number of services or
linkages to services that they provide, but rather that they can offer a combination of components in
response to needs and objectives, in line with available capacity and resources.
We discuss each component in more detail below.

9

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

Figure 1 Menu of ‘cash plus’ components (Authors’ own)
Provision of access
to services

/
tion C
rma n/BC
o
f
o
In tasi
isi
ens

s

Add

iti
in-k onal b
e
ind
tran nefits
/
sfe
rs

CASH
TRANSFERS

Psychosocial
support
Facilitating linkages
to services

1.3. Integral programme components
Additional benefits or in-kind transfers
The provision of additional benefits or in-kind transfers is based on the recognition that the income
effect of cash transfers is often not large enough for achieving desired outcomes, or that structural
factors impede the use of cash for affecting change. Often, cash transfers need to respond to multiple
needs across all household members and are spread too thinly to make a significant impact in any one
area. Indeed, higher transfer levels are associated with higher impacts across education, health and
nutrition (Bastagli et al. 2016). Graduation programmes explicitly acknowledge the need for additional
benefits over and above regular cash transfers in order to achieve the desired level of asset
accumulation; the provision of asset transfers represents an investment in productive capital beyond
what would be feasible on the basis of cash transfers alone (Sabates-Wheeler and Devereux, 2013). In
Niger, cash transfers were complemented with the provision of fortified foods and supplementary
feeding given that such foods were not locally available (Bastagli et al. 2016). The combination of
support led to more significant reductions in malnutrition compared to the provision of cash alone
(Langendorf et al. 2014).
Information/ sensitisation/ behaviour change communication (BCC)
This component aims to achieve positive outcomes by increasing knowledge and awareness and
changing attitudes and practice (important ‘mediators’ of programme impacts). Many theories of
change cash transfer programmes recognize that lack of knowledge may undermine programme
impacts, notably in terms of nutrition and health (Browne, 2013) and child-rearing practices (Bastagli et
al. 2016). With reference to nutrition, awareness raising and creation of knowledge can ensure that
parents use their cash transfers to purchase more nutritious foods and improve sanitation practices
that prevent diarrhoea (de Montesquiou and Sheldon, 2014). Many programmes have indeed started
adding this component to the regular provision of cash (Molyneux et al. 2016) with activities ranging
from the provision of information at pay points by programme staff, community-level training by
volunteers or NGOs, to home visits by community volunteers or social workers.

10

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

Longstanding debates on communication for development (C4D), health communication and BCC
suggest that modes of implementation are crucial in effecting change (Storey and Figueroa, 2012;
Waisbord and Obregon, 2012), increasingly underscoring the need for interpersonal communication for
effective messaging. With reference to the graduation programme in Burundi, the role of case
managers and their strong interpersonal relationships with participants proved crucial for the uptake of
messages and subsequent positive behavioural change (Roelen and Devereux, 2017).
Psycho-social support
The importance of psycho-social well-being in social protection is increasingly recognized, either as an
outcome of social protection programming (Attah et al. 2016) or as an instrumental factor towards
achieving transformative change (Molyneux et al. 2016). The potential for social protection
programmes to link to forms of psycho-social support have emerged from discussions regarding the
response to HIV/AIDS and Orphans and Vulnerable Children (OVC) (Adato and Bassett, 2012). Zambia’s
Social Safety Net Project, for example, included a counselling module for those affected by HIV/AIDS in
recognition of the persistence of mental health problems (Miller and Samson, 2012). In South Africa,
adolescents in cash transfer households which also received household visits by a home-based carer
reported fewer HIV risk-taking behaviours among adolescent than those in households only receiving
cash (Cluver et al. 2014). The inclusion of psychosocial support as a core component of social
protection programmes is also increasingly considered in strengthening the linkages between social
protection and child protection. Nevertheless, many questions remain regarding the appropriate remit
and implementation of such support (Roelen et al. 2016b).

1.4. Linkages to external support
Providing access to services
This component pertains to the explicit provision of access to services in addition to the distribution of
cash transfers. This can include the inclusion of beneficiaries in insurance or micro-credit schemes to
provide access to health or financial services, or waiving tuition fees to specifically lower barriers to
education. Participants in Concern Worldwide’s Graduation Programmes in Rwanda and Burundi, for
example, all received health insurance cards that granted free primary health care for all household
members (Devereux et al. 2015; Devereux and Sabates, 2016). The Temporary Livelihood Protection
Programme in South Korea combined cash transfers to those who had become unemployed following
the economic crisis of the late 1990s with tuition fee waivers, lunch subsidies, and reductions in
medical insurance premiums (Blouin et al. 2007). While the provision of such support is part of the
‘cash plus’ intervention, the actual take-up and use of services occurs in the health and education
sectors.
Facilitating linkages to services
This component pertains to the facilitation of linkages to services (as opposed to directly providing
access to services). This includes referral to services with voluntary take-up, the establishment of
non-punitive co-responsibilities, or making the transfer conditional upon the use of services (such as in
conditional cash transfer programmes (CCTs)). Referral to services is increasingly considered crucial for
addressing multiple needs of the most vulnerable (Roelen et al. 2012). In Mozambique, case
management and referral are deemed crucial for linking social protection and child protection services.
Here, the Community Child Protection Committees (CCPCs) identify and assesses needs while social
workers supervise and monitor support offered to children (Roelen, 2011). Case management can help
identify needs of programme participants and facilitate linkages to corresponding services. Case
management can be resource intensive, and the potential for this option may be limited in some

11

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

contexts without significant capacity strengthening – for example of the social welfare or social worker
cadres – beforehand.
Interventions operating co-responsibilities or conditions require programme participants to comply
with certain requirements, such as children’s school attendance or health check-ups. Such interventions
often include regular monitoring of the adherence to co-responsibilities or conditions, involving social
workers, case managers or community volunteers undertaking monitoring meetings or home visits.
The frequency of interaction with service providers can have powerful positive results (Jones and
Marquez 2014). Indeed, a strong evidence base – primarily from CCTs in Latin America – provides
testimony to the positive effects of such interventions regarding the use of services, most notably
education and health, and also with respect to improved nutritional outcomes and reduced child labour
(Gatenio Gabel, 2012). A systematic review of the differential impact of unconditional cash transfers
(UCTs) and CCTs on schooling indicates that programmes with explicit conditions, strong monitoring
and punitive action in case of non-compliance have greater impacts on enrolment. No differential
impacts were observed in terms of learning outcomes such as test scores (Baird et al. 2013). On the
whole, evidence does not allow for conclusions to be drawn regarding the differential impact of coresponsibilities and conditions or the extent to which a supportive versus punitive approach enhances
or undermines impact.
A key factor for the successful facilitation of linkages at scale is a functioning Management Information
System (MIS). Benefits of MIS include increased efficiency in targeting, improved oversight and
coordination of multiple schemes, potential for establishment of a common payment system across
schemes, improved fraud management, more effective emergency response, and improved ability to
transition beneficiaries across schemes as their circumstances change (Barca and Chirchir, 2014).
Requirements for successful MIS include strong political commitment to integration, sufficient staff
availability and capacity, adequate hardware and internet connection, a solid system for national
identification (such as a civil registry), and existence of a clear and high-level governance structure
which can manage the process and liaise with all stakeholders (Barca and Chirchir, 2014).
In order to learn lessons from ‘cash plus’ interventions, we look at three case studies with varying
combinations of ‘plus’ components. The first case study – Ghana’s LEAP programme – offers access to
services by automatically enrolling its participants in the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS). The
second case study – Chile’s Chile Solidario scheme – includes the provision of psycho-social support,
facilitating access to services, adherence to conditions and case management and referrals. It should
be noted upfront that in this case study, the cash transfer was not deemed the central component
around which other components were framed but that it existed on par with the other programme
components. The final case study – Ethiopia’s Integrated Nutrition Social Cash Transfer (IN-SCT) pilot
project – offers a combination of information/ BCC and a case management approach.

12

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

2. GHANA: LIVELIHOODS EMPOWEREMENT AGAINST POVERTY (LEAP)
PROGRAMME
2.1. Background and programme description
Ghana introduced several social policy interventions during the 2000s, including a new contributory
national health insurance scheme (2003), a national school feeding programme (2005), capitation
grants to expand free primary education (2005), and the flagship Livelihood Empowerment Against
Poverty (LEAP) cash transfer programme (2008). As part of the review of the Ghana Poverty Reduction
Strategy (GPRS I, 2003-2005), a Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) was conducted by the
National Development Planning Commission in 2004. It showed that past policies and interventions did
not adequately impact the lives of the poorest, leading to rising levels of inequality. There was a
perceived need take a more holistic approach to the redesign and coordination of social intervention
programmes in order to integrate the concerns of the poorest and most vulnerable segments of society
into national development efforts. These observations informed the development of a National Social
Protection Strategy (NSPS) under the leadership of the Ministry of Employment and Social Welfare
(MESW), between 2005 and 2007.
Launched in 2008, LEAP is a social protection programme that provides bi-monthly cash transfers to
households living below the national extreme poverty line. Specifically, LEAP targets poor families
which also have at least one member who is aged (over 65), or who has a disability and is unable to
work (PWD), or who is an orphan or vulnerable child (OVC); or who is a pregnant woman, or who is a
child under one year of age. The overall goal is to increase long-term human capital development
among the poorest and most vulnerable populations. More specifically, LEAP seeks to:
(1) Improve basic household consumption and nutrition, and access to health care services among
children under two years old, older persons and people with severe disability;
(2) Increase basic school enrolment, attendance and retention of beneficiary children between the ages
of 5-15; and
(3) Facilitate access to complementary services such as welfare, livelihoods, and improvements in
productive capacity (MESW, 2012).
The level of the LEAP benefit varies, depending on the number of eligible people in a household. At the
time of writing, benefits range from GH¢64 to GH¢106 bi-monthly for households with one and four or
more eligible members, respectively (Appiah, 2016). The number of LEAP beneficiary households has
expanded rapidly over time, from just 1,654 in 21 districts in 2008, to 213,000 households in all 216
districts by 2016. Transfers are conditional or unconditional depending on the characteristics of
beneficiary households.2 From 2012, the programme’s operational manual requires that children under
15 years of age enrol in and attend school, visit health facilities for vaccinations, and undergo growth
monitoring every 3 months (MESW, 2012). Conditions are not enforced, however (Handa et al. 2013).

2

http://leap.gov.gh/44th-payment-cycle-of-leap-social-cash-grant-212848-households-to-be-paid-for-the-months-of-july-and-august-2016/

13

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

2.2. ‘Cash plus’ components
LEAP promotes an ‘integrated social development approach’. This needs to be understood in reference
to the NSPS, which not only gave birth to the LEAP but also marked the beginning of an integrated
approach to social protection in Ghana (GoG, 2015: 23). The NSPS recognizes the multi-dimensional
nature of poverty and vulnerability in Ghana, and argues that such problems cannot be effectively
tackled through cash transfers alone (GoG, 2007a: 10). Consequently, the NSPS emphasises the
importance of linking beneficiary households with other programmes as a way of facilitating their
capacity to ‘leap out’ of extreme poverty (GoG, 2007a: 59). It calls for linking LEAP beneficiary
households to initiatives that will help boost their productive capacities and assets, including the
Labour Intensive Public Works Programme, the Agricultural Input Support Programme, the Micro
Finance Scheme, the Youth Employment Programme, and the free Cocoa Mass Spraying Programme
(GoG, 2007a: 53, 60). As such, the LEAP design document outlines a broad array of potential linkages
between LEAP and other programmes (GoG, 2007b).
Against this backdrop, in 2010 the then MESW signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with
the Ministry of Health to provide LEAP beneficiaries with free access to NHIS cards. To date, this MoU
represents the only linkage to a complementary service for LEAP.3 In this section, therefore, we focus
specifically on this LEAP-NHIS linkage, which is by far the most ‘well established’ complementarity in
Ghana’s social protection landscape (Ragno et al. 2016: 153).
Providing access to services: LEAP–NHIS complementarity
The NHIS was established in 2003 to remove financial barriers in accessing health services, particularly
for the poor and vulnerable. The programme’s ultimate goal is to provide universal insurance coverage
to all Ghanaians. By 2014, the number of active NHIS members stood at 10.5 million, representing 39%
of the national population (GoG, 2015: 149). The scheme is financed mainly through a combination of
individual premiums, a 2.5% levy added to the value-added tax on goods and services and an
earmarked 2.5 percentage point portion of social security contributions from formal sector workers.
Individual premiums are charged based on each person’s income or wealth, ranging from about GH¢8
for those categorised as poor, GH¢20 for middle income earners, and GH¢52 for high income earners
(GoG, 2012: 67). Premium payments are waived for a wide range of vulnerable groups, including
people over age 70; children under 18 years; ‘indigents’4; pregnant women, persons with mental
disorders and categories of disabled persons determined by the minister responsible for social welfare.
By design, the scheme covers about 95% of the disease burden in Ghana (Schieber et al. 2012: 21). The
scope of the basic benefits package is broad and includes outpatient and inpatient services – such as
diagnostic testing, specialist care, most forms of surgery, hospital accommodation, maternity care
services, emergency care, and drugs on the NHIA Medicine List (ILO, 2014).
LEAP beneficiaries are entitled to free health insurance through the NHIS and are encouraged to access
post-natal clinics and birth registration as well as complete the Expanded Programme on Immunisation
(Ragno et al. 2016). This arrangement is facilitated through the MoU with the Ministry of Health, which
requires the National Health Insurance Authority (NHIA) to register all LEAP household members with

3		To a limited extent and without a formal MoU, the Labour Intensive Public Works (LIPW) programme has also been linked to
LEAP Households. As of June 2016, members from 2,800 LEAP families have taken part to the LIPW (Source: LIPW Information
System).
4		These are defined as those who are unemployed with no visible source of income, no fixed residence, and not living with
someone employed and with a fixed residence.

14

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

no payment of premiums or processing fees. Funds to cover enrolment in health insurance are
transferred directly to the local health authority, which then issues NHIS cards to LEAP households.
Continued receipt of cash payments from LEAP is conditioned on acquiring a health insurance card
(Handa and Park, 2012) although this has never been enforced.
Enrolment of new LEAP beneficiaries into the NHIS is carried out during LEAP payment days. District
NHIS officials join District Social Welfare Officers (DSWOs) to provide information on the NHIS,
distribute free NHIS cards, and update registries of beneficiaries. Additional efforts include quarterly
meetings between NHIA and DSWOs to improve implementation and coordination (Gomez et al. 2016:
23).
The recognition of the importance of the NHIS-LEAP linkage became much stronger among policymakers in light of empirical evidence on the modesty of the transfer size5 and LEAP beneficiaries using
their transfers to pay NHIS premiums and purchase school supplies and food items. One study cited a
female LEAP beneficiary in the poorer northern part of the country as remarking: “Our NHIS card has
expired. I wish the LEAP payment was larger as we couldn’t renew it given the cost. If we had money,
we would renew the health insurance’ (ODI and UNICEF Ghana, 2009, cited in Amuzu et al. (2010: 31)).
Handa et al.’s (2013) quantitative impact assessment shows that LEAP households modestly reduced
their out-of-pocket health expenditures by up to GH¢7 per month through enrolment in the NHIS. These
findings are consistent with the overarching objective of the LEAP-NHIS complementarity, which seeks
to increase access to health care services among LEAP beneficiaries by reducing their health care
expenditures and thereby enabling them to use the cash grant on other productive activities (Ministry
of Gender, Children and Social Protection, 2016).

2.3. Explaining success
In explaining factors for success, the history of the NHIS-LEAP linkages can be split into two broad
phases, namely from 2010 to 2014 and from 2015 to date. While the first phase saw very limited efforts
on the part of either the LEAP programme or NHIA in forging partnerships beyond the MoU, the second
has been characterised by a deliberate push to linking LEAP households to the NHIS. The NHIS had
been registering LEAP beneficiaries since the 2010 MoU but various challenges undermined its
effectiveness.
First, while the MoU required that LEAP beneficiaries be registered with the NHIS before receipt of their
first payments, this was not always implemented effectively. Second, there were few efforts by NHIA
officials to deliberately target LEAP households during NHIS registration exercises, leading to several
LEAP households not being registered with the NHIS or having invalid insurance cards (that required
renewal).
From 2015 onwards, the LEAP programme office initiated engagements with the NHIA aimed at
identifying modalities to facilitate the registration of LEAP beneficiary households with the NHIS. To
help build broad-based consensus on the importance of improving the health status of LEAP
beneficiary households through the NHIS, both the Regional Director of Social Welfare for the Greater
Accra region and District Social Welfare Officers (DSWOs) sometimes participated in meetings between

5

For example, at the start of the programme, some LEAP households received as little as GH₵8, at a time when about ₵7 was
required to renew one’s NHIS card.

15

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

the LEAP programme and the NHIA. These engagements proved useful in enhancing mutual
understanding of the complementarity of their roles in improving the health status of LEAP
households, and in overcoming NHIS enrolment constraints faced by LEAP beneficiaries.
Overcoming exclusion of LEAP beneficiaries from NHIS as a result of different inclusion criteria for
LEAP and NHIS represent a case in point. While LEAP targets extremely poor households, the NHIS
targets extremely poor individuals. As a result, NHIA officials would occasionally refuse to provide free
NHIS cards to LEAP beneficiary caregivers on grounds that they – as individuals – did not look
extremely poor. Regular engagements between the LEAP programme office and NHIA ensured that the
NHIS district teams were provided with new and complete lists of LEAP household members, enabling
the teams to include all the members of the LEAP households in the registration for the NHIS.
Collaboration between NHIA and LEAP programme staff is crucial; the LEAP programme does not have
the direct mandate of registering beneficiary households and their members with the NHIS and
therefore cannot achieve its objectives without the direct involvement of the NHIA. By the same token,
NHIA experienced difficulties in meeting its targets regarding reaching the extremely poor because it
did not have the internal capacity of identifying them.6 As a result of the growing collaboration and
greater reliance on data provided by the LEAP programme, the NHIA has been able to increase the
number of indigents exempted under the NHIS from a mere 1.4% of all NHIS beneficiaries in 2010 (see
NHIA, 2011:18) to 5.5% by 2014 (GoG, 2015: 150). This analysis suggests that the realization on the part
of the implementing institutions that the most efficient way of delivering their respective mandates is
through partnerships, is central to understanding the growing improvement achieved by linking LEAP
beneficiaries to the NHIS.
Indeed, the increased collaboration between LEAP and the NHIA has manifested itself in several ways,
such as the establishment of a LEAP-NHIS technical committee7, and the joint development of a plan to
increase the number of valid NHIS card-holders in LEAP households. The plan includes the sharing of a
complete list of LEAP households and LEAP registration timetables with the NHIA, outlining District
Social Welfare Officers’ (DSWOs’) and district-level NHIA representatives’ visiting dates to LEAP
communities, in order to provide beneficiary households with free NHIS cards.
In March 2016, a five-day pilot exercise in two districts was jointly undertaken and monitored by
national NHIA officials and LEAP programme officers. It targeted three groups of LEAP beneficiaries for
NHIS enrolment: (i) those who were not registered with the scheme; (ii) those whose NHIS cards had
expired; and (iii) those whose cards were about to expire within a three-month period. The pilot project
was considered a success, prompting the Minister of Gender, Children and Social Protection to
recommend it be rolled-out nationally.
In August 2016, the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection (MoGCSP), created in January
2013 with a mandate to coordinate social protection in Ghana8, launched a nationwide exercise aimed
at enrolling 200,000 additional LEAP beneficiaries in the NHIS by December 2016. The Ministry

6
7
8

The NHIA had already partnered with the Ghana Education Service (GES) to identify and enrol children through the school
system, but had not been able to capture those out of the system, or those populations from other priority groups.
Comprising members from the LEAP programme and the NHIA, the primary mandate of this committee was to spell out
specific modalities that will ensure the enrolment of all LEAP households with the NHIS.
MoGCSP is an amalgam of MOWAC, the Department of Social Welfare and the Social Protection Division of the then Ministry
of Employment and Social Welfare.

16

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

explained this nation-wide exercise as a way of fulfilling one of the key objectives of LEAP, which is to
increase health care access among beneficiaries and ensure that the LEAP transfers can be directed at
consumption and productive livelihood initiatives. As a result, an additional 80,000 LEAP households
were registered with the NHIS by late October 2016. Although this pace of progress makes the
achievement of the desired target by December 2016 unlikely, the LEAP-NHIS linkage nevertheless
remains the most successful example of complementarity in Ghana’s social protection landscape.
High-level political commitment, especially on the part of the Minister in charge of the MoGCSP from
2013-2017 (Nana Oye Lithur), is widely considered to have played a key role in facilitating this success
story. While discussions about linking LEAP households to the NHIS had been ongoing for years, few
practical measures were taken to operationalize this ‘entitlement’ until the Minister repeatedly declared
it as priority. The fact that both the pilot and the nationwide registration exercises are fully funded by
the MoGCSP highlights this commitment. The total cost of the registration exercises is estimated to be
GHC| 5 million, representing the largest project ever funded for LEAP by the MoGCSP, at a time when
the project was not originally included in the budget. This raises questions as to how the Minister was
able to provide substantial off-budget resources for the NHIS registration of LEAP households at a time
when the national economy was in serious difficulty.
A key explanation relates to the political incentives of the current ruling National Democratic Congress
(NDC) party, which assumed office in 2013. In its party manifesto for the December 2012 elections, the
NDC pledged to increase the number of LEAP beneficiaries and to ensure an ‘expanded coverage of the
National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS) to all 71,000 LEAP beneficiary households’ (NDC, 2012: 25).
The political commitment to the LEAP-NHIS linkages thus seem to have been partly influenced by the
potential electoral advantages associated with this initiative, which was clearly in line with the electoral
promises of the ruling party. The electoral advantages of this initiative were also enhanced by the
highly visible nature of incentives to voters, entailing the provision of free transportation of households
to registration centres, the provision of free snacks during the registration exercise, and the free
provision/renewal of NHIS cards. Moreover, President John Mahama expressed strong commitment to
the implementation of an integrated social protection system in Ghana. He demonstrated this
commitment in various ways, including through the establishment of MoGCSP in 2013, the
appointment of a well-respected human rights activist to head this Ministry, and the launch of a
national social protection policy in June 2016.
Notwithstanding the observed success, two points of caution should be taken into account: First,
registration with the NHIS is no guarantee of provision of high-quality health care. The strong increase
in NHIS coverage among LEAP households has not been accompanied by a commensurate impact on
the utilisation of health services, nor has it resulted in significant reductions in out-of-pocket health
expenditure. Moreover, despite the large increase in NHIS coverage among LEAP beneficiaries, this did
not have any impact on the curative health care seeking behaviour among households (Handa et al.
2013). Second, issues of sustainability remain a concern. Greater resource allocation will be required to
fully implement this initiative. Furthermore, there is considerable uncertainty around outcomes of the
2016 elections and subsequent changes in ministerial appointments.

17

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

2.4. Lessons learned
i. Putting in place formal agreements with the institutions charged with the responsibility of providing
complementary social protection services, which spell out roles and responsibilities of each
implementing institution, is crucial. The MoU between NHIA and the Ministry in charge of LEAP
implementation was fundamental to laying the foundations for effective collaboration towards
enrolling LEAP beneficiaries with the NHIS.
ii. Effective operationalization of formal agreements requires the involvement of ‘champions’ of social
protection within governing coalitions. While the MoU between LEAP and the NHIA was signed as
far back as 2010, practical steps towards linking LEAP beneficiaries to the NHIS were only taken after
the appointment of Minister Nana Oye Lithur for the MoGCSP – a well-known social protection
activist who enjoyed substantial influence within the governing party at the time. The fact that other
MoUs between the LEAP and other Ministries such as Agriculture, Local Government and Rural
Development have not been followed by practical action is a demonstration of the limitations of
formal agreements in the absence of effective agents of change.
iii. Implementation of complementary services across institutions is facilitated when institutions share
objectives or have overlapping mandates, as in the case of the LEAP and NHIA. Implementing
institutions are likely to take the provision of complementary services seriously, when the outcomes
of their efforts have direct bearing on their ability to deliver on their core mandates.
iv. Political economy dynamics – including electoral incentives – should be taken into account when
aiming to forge linkages. Forging effective complementarities generally requires additional
resources and the ruling political elites are likely to make such resources available if they deem such
complementarities compatible with their own political survival strategies. In this respect, politics
and political economy dynamics are just as important as technocratic factors in the coordinated
delivery of social protection.

3. CHILE SOLIDARIO
3.1. Background and programme description
Chile Solidario was launched during Ricardo Lagos’s presidency (2000–2006) and implemented from
2002 to 20129. The programme was established following an intense public and political debate, putting
Chile’s economic and social development model under scrutiny and calling for new policy solutions.
While conditional cash transfers (CCTs) quickly became very popular in the majority of Latin American
countries, the Chilean government tried to follow a different strategy by implementing an innovative
anti-poverty programme based on a multi-sectoral and integrated approach, combining demand- and
supply-side interventions targeted to the most vulnerable families (MIDEPLAN, 2002). When President
Ricardo Lagos came into office in 2000, he considered the reduction of extreme poverty to be a priority,
assigning an expert in poverty eradication policies as the new Minister of MIDEPLAN (Ministry of

9

The programme has since been transformed into the Ingreso Etico Familiar programme, expanding the set of transfers and
conditions in comparison to Chile Solidario (no longer exclusively targeting families living in extreme poverty) and including a
more central focus on labour market and productive inclusion features (Cecchini, Robles and Vargas, 2012).

18

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

Planning and Cooperation). The establishment of the Chile Solidario programme was directly overseen
by the Office of the President.
Chile Solidario was based on the premise that poverty has multiple and interacting dimensions that
tend to interact with one another, often in accumulating and self-reinforcing ways, thereby provoking a
vicious cycle of poverty. As a result, only multi-sectoral policy actions directed at these different
dimensions were thought to be effective in tackling poverty. In addition, while cash transfers were
considered useful for protecting the most vulnerable groups and improving their living conditions in
the short term, it was recognized that cash transfers had to be integrated with other interventions
promoting opportunities and rights. In fact, cash transfers and compliance with conditions was only
considered secondary to psychosocial support and linkages to services (Cecchini, Robles and Vargas,
2012).
Eligibility for Chile Solidario was based on a proxy-means test in four principal domains, namely
education, income, health and housing. The eligibility threshold varied by municipality in order to
reflect geographical diversity. Participation was voluntary and during the period 2002–2012 some
480,000 families (around 2 million people) were invited to participate. Take-up was high with only 2.2
per cent refusing to participate in the programme and 5.6 per cent not fully completing the application
(Camacho et al. 2014). Conditions were defined by households and social workers to fit their respective
situations, with access to cash transfers being conditional upon satisfaction of those conditions, as set
out in a contract agreement between beneficiary households and social workers (Galasso, 2006).
Programme participation was limited to a period of five years, divided into two distinct phases: (i) an
intensive phase of two years and (ii) a follow-up phase of three years. The main components of support
included cash transfers, additional monetary subsidies, psycho-social support and preferential access
to social programmes (see Figure 2). Beneficiaries received a monetary transfer (Bono de Protección)
on a sliding scale over time: 10,500 pesos (USD 15.45) per month for the first 6 months, which was
gradually decreased to 3,500 pesos (USD 5.15) per month between months 19 and 24. From the third
year onwards, participants only received an unconditional cash transfer (Bono de Egreso) with an
amount equivalent to the last (Bono de Protección) transfer, i.e. 3,500 pesos (Schulte, 2007) and no
longer benefited from psycho-social support. The purpose was to stimulate and promote households’
efforts in the process of graduation from the programme after five years, reducing the dependence on
public transfers as much as possible. Indeed, this transfer was considered purely as compensation for
participation in the programme (Carneiro et al. 2015).
The most innovative parts of the programme were related to the interactions between the psychosocial support intervention (Puente programme) and the network of social services. In particular, the
psycho-social support was considered crucial for bringing vulnerable groups into the network of social
services through tailored interventions (Cecchini et al. 2012). Beneficiaries received ‘preferential access’
to services, which was believed to be crucial for making the target population ‘visible’ to municipalities
and service providers (Amior et al. 2012). Moreover, participants benefited from monetary subsidies for
which they were eligible (but in many cases had not previously taken advantage of) such as the
Subsidio Unico Familiar (SUF), the Pensiones Asistenciales programme (PASIS) and the Subsidio de
Agua Potable (SAP).10

10 The Subsidio Único Familiar (SUF) is a family allowance targeted at poor families with children under 18 years, people with
disabilities and pregnant women. The Pensions Asistenciales programme (PASIS) is a non-contributory system of social

19

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

Figure 2: Components of Chile Solidario programme (Martorano and Sanfilippo 2012)
Psycho-social support
(Puente Programme)

Bono de Protección

Bono de Egreso

Guaranteed monetary subsidies (SAP, PASIS and SUF)

Preferential access to social programmes

Intensive phase (2 years)

Follow-up phase (3 years)

3.2. ‘Cash plus’ components
We discuss two major ‘plus’ components of Chile Solidario – one that is inherent to the programme,
namely psycho--social support – and another that is external to the programme, namely preferential
access to other social programmes. The discussion demonstrates the overlap and synergetic effects
between both components given the role of social workers in providing psycho-social support and
facilitating linkages to services.
Psychosocial support
Provision of psycho-social support was considered crucial for bringing vulnerable groups into the
network of social services through tailored interventions (Cecchini et al. 2012). In the first phase of
programme participation, psycho-social support consisted of intensive working sessions aimed at
addressing the specific needs of each beneficiary household (Government of Chile, 2004). This
component was called the Puente programme and was thought of as the ‘entrance’ into the overall
Chile Solidario programme.
The initial period was based on an intensive relationship between social workers and families in order
to build trust, understand each family’s current situation and develop an action plan (Apoyo familiar) in
7 dimensions – identification, health, education, family dynamics, housing conditions, work and income
– along with 53 minimum conditions considered strategically important to evaluate quality of life. This
action plan represented the basis for evaluating the households’ progress during the following 16–18
months (until month 24), identifying their weaknesses, ensuring their access to monetary subsidies and
providing access to services that better responded to the needs of each household.

pensions which provides benefits for people over 65 years (who do not receive contributory pensions) and for disabled and
mentally ill people living in poverty. The Subsidio de Agua Potable (SAP) is a transfer amounting to 100% of water bills for up
to 15 cubic meters of the monthly consumption.

20

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

The component of psycho-social support consisted of 21 home visits of 40–45 minutes each. These
home visits were made by social workers and were more frequent during the first 6–8 months, but
decreased over time. Social workers were located at the municipality level and professionally trained
as Family Counsellors (Camacho et al. 2014:14).
Facilitating linkages to services
Promoting access to social services was considered instrumental to improving living standards of the
poor, particularly as various vulnerable groups experienced problems in accessing services or
programmes. Before the introduction of the Chile Solidario, only 4 out 10 among the poorest and
eligible households benefitted from the Subsidio Unico Familiar (SUF) (Amior et al. 2012). Lack of
information, high transaction costs and psychological factors were identified as barriers to the access
of services (Clert, 2000; Amior et al. 2012). The programme therefore tried to reconnect participants to
the network of social services and to rebuild social capital at the local level by promoting an active
engagement of beneficiaries. In order to do this, it was important that (i) the government put in place
the necessary conditions and opportunities for the families to get access to the network of social
programmes and services; (ii) families had sufficient and timely information on existing resources; and
(iii) social workers acted as intermediaries between families and the institutional network of social
services.
In the first two years of programme implementation (2002-2004), the government worked to ensure an
adequate supply of social services. Many programmes for vulnerable groups already existed before
Chile Solidario, but no mechanisms were in place to assure the integration and synchronization of
programmes and services. Chile Solidario promoted the coordination of services at the municipal level
with the aim of assuring that the supply of services matched the demand of participating families.
Evidence highlights that the programme was able to facilitate access to health and education services
and social programmes (Chamaco et al. 2014; Carneiro et al. 2015; Galasso, 2006; Martorano and
Sanfilippo, 2012; Perticara, 2007) especially in urban areas (Galasso and Carneiro, 2007). New
programmes were created in subsequent years of programme implementation, including labour
market access, skills training and micro-finance interventions that exclusively targeted families
participating in Chile Solidario in order to promote employment (Government of Chile, 2004).
Social workers played a crucial intermediary role among participants, existing social services and local
communities. They provided the families with the necessary information and suitable guidance,
thereby ensuring their access to the existing programmes and services. They were also pivotal in
supporting families to autonomously navigate the social service network and to sustain improved
living conditions in the long run. This was done through the development of skills, capabilities,
information as well as autonomy and self-efficacy.

21

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

3.3. Explaining success
Various factors can be identified to have played key roles in facilitating the implementation of the ‘plus’
components of Chile Solidario.
A crucial factor in facilitating coordination of services at the municipal level and overcoming initial
frictions (CEPAL, 2003) was the promulgation of the Law 19,949 in 2004 and its associated regulations
(Palma and Urzúa, 2005). This law contributed to clarifying the procedural norms as well as improving
the management of the Chile Solidario system in addressing potential institutional conflicts (ibid). In
particular, the law charged the Ministry of Planning and Cooperation (Ministerio de Planificacion y
Cooperacion – MIDEPLAN) with administration, coordination, supervision and evaluation of the
programme. One of the consequences was that the different institutions operating in areas such as
education, health, housing, justice and labour had to work in cooperation with MIDEPLAN to provide
preferential access to programme beneficiaries.
A second factor pertains to the devolution of programme implementation to sub-national and local
levels and the focus on addressing supply-side constraints. Direct responsibility for implementation of
the Puente programme at central, regional and municipal levels was transferred to the Fondo de
Inversión Social (FOSIS),11 while responsibility for programme execution at local level was transferred
to the Family Action Unit. This unit played a crucial role in ensuring and promoting coordination within
the existing institutional supply of public and private services at local level. A Local Action Network
convened by the municipality and composed of public and private service providers supported the
Family Action Unit to better identify gaps and to promote solutions to achieve the targeted population
(Ruz and Palma, 2005). Qualitative indicators were collected regularly on the local supply side (Carneiro
et al. 2009) as well as on the social and demographic characteristics of each family participating in Chile
Solidario, and progress and problems over each period (Larrañaga et al. 2015); this was aimed at
facilitating creation and re-orientation of programmes. If the existing supply of services was insufficient
for meeting minimum conditions, municipalities could turn to the provincial and regional levels for
resources to address the constraints (Schulte, 2007). The reorganisation of public services at the local
level also moved psycho-social support from its traditional position of a single stand-alone intervention
to its integration into a comprehensive and coordinated system of social protection.
The strong role of well-trained social workers at the municipal level can be considered another key
factor for success of the Chile Solidario programme. The contribution of social workers was
strategically important in achieving good results in education and health because they worked closely
with the families. This highlights the importance of health system enrolment or school attendance for
the facilitation of physical and cognitive child development (Martorano and Sanfilippo, 2012). In
addition, the activity of social workers was crucial in promoting the take-up of additional monetary
subsidies that were available to beneficiary households (Hoces de la Guardia et al. 2011).
Analyzing the case of the Subsidio Unico Familiar, Amior et al. (2012) explain that the increasing access
to this benefit by poor people was due to the increasing flow of information as well as the decreasing
application costs. Social workers operated at the municipality level and were incorporated into the local
Family Intervention Unit (UIF). The number of social workers for each municipality was based on the

11 FOSIS was created in 1990 with the aim to design, finance and implement programmes for promoting employment and social
development. FOSIS also designed the Puente Programme (Palma and Urzúa, 2005).

22

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

number of participating families in the area. Between 2002 and 2006 there were around 2,400 social
workers, half of whom were municipal employees while the others were contracted through
competitive public bids within the municipalities and under mutual agreement between the FOSIS and
the UIF (Schulte, 2007). Social workers were professionally trained as Family Counsellors (95% were
university graduates) and each had a case load of 60–100 families (Camacho et al. 2014: 14).

3.4. Lessons learned
i. Legislative frameworks are important for setting out roles and responsibilities across implementing
agencies, especially when many sectors are involved. In the case of Chile Solidario, the
promulgation of the 2004 law institutionalized the content of the programme transforming political
will into a legal mandate. It clarified the specific role of the different actors facilitating the
management and the implementation of the programme, reducing potential conflicts among
participating agencies and promoting the coordination of institutional activities across levels and
sectors.
ii. Addressing supply-side constraints is vital for achieving positive change. The programme’s success
in facilitating access to services and social programmes was enhanced by the ability of the
programme to work on the supply-side, improving the quantity and quality of services. A larger
impact was achieved when the expansion of the supply of social services was effectively
implemented and services were tailored to the needs of the targeted population. By contrast, Chile
Solidario was less effective when policy interventions were rationed, as in the case of housing
programmes.
iii. Social workers play crucial direct and indirect roles. Their close work with families directly promotes
children’s physical and cognitive development and psycho-social well-being. The programme
registered positive impacts on participants’ subjective well-being (Chamaco et al. 2014) in terms of
high aspirations (Trucco and Nun, 2008) and optimism (Carneiro et al. 2015), better future
expectations (Galasso, 2006) and positive attitudes for dealing with problems (Perticara, 2007).
Qualitative evidence shows that the activity of social workers was important in promoting a
forward-looking orientation and restoring the confidence and self-image of individuals (Universidad
de Chile, 2004; Asesorias para el Desarrollo, 2005, Trucco and Nun, 2008). Social workers also
proved vital for linking beneficiaries to services to which they have preferential access. They were
crucial in promoting the take-up of subsidies (Hoces de la Guardia et al. 2011). It should be noted
that the programme was less able to activate the demand for public services among certain groups,
particularly the poorest (Trucco and Nun, 2008). In some cases, lack of improvement in employment
or income generated dissatisfaction and mistrust directed at public institutions and social workers
(ibid).

23

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

4. ETHIOPIA: INTEGRATED NUTRITION SOCIAL CASH TRANSFER (IN-SCT) PILOT
4.1. Background and programme description
In 2005, the Government of Ethiopia launched the Productive Safety Net Programme (PSNP) as an
innovative approach to address food insecurity and hunger, especially in the historically famine-prone
rural highland areas. Before the PSNP, Ethiopia made annual emergency appeals for food aid, which
addressed immediate food needs but left millions of households chronically food insecure and
dependent on further food aid appeals the following year. The theory of change behind the PSNP was
that providing food insecure households with a sustained package of support for several years would
enable them to accumulate productive assets and achieve self-reliant livelihoods, where self-reliance
was defined as the ability to cover household food needs all year round and to withstand moderate
shocks (FSCB, 2007). Households were eligible for the PSNP provided they were chronically food
insecure. A chronically food insecure household was defined as a food aid recipient for the previous
three years12. Eligible households with labour capacity were assigned to Public Works (temporary
employment on labour-based community infrastructure projects), and those with no labour capacity
received Direct Support (unconditional food or cash transfers for six months every year).
Since its inception the programme has been widely expanded, has undergone a number of reforms
and has been subject to rigorous mixed-method programme evaluations. The programme has been
found to reduce household vulnerability, food insecurity, and distress sale of assets (Berhane et al.
2011). However, the programme has had little effect on child nutrition and use of health services has
remained low (UNICEF, 2016).
In 2015, the government launched Phase 4 of the PSNP. PSNP4 includes several innovations designed
to strengthen the programme and improve its outcomes, particularly with respect to nutrition and
health (UNICEF, 2016). Changes include increases in quantity and duration of transfers and greater
integration with delivery of social services such as health and nutrition services. Food and cash transfer
payments were raised for Public Works and Direct Support participants, in response to evidence from
previous evaluations demonstrating that payments were too small to achieve any significant impact.
The duration of transfers was also extended from six months to twelve months for Permanent Direct
Support (PDS) beneficiaries. A new category of Temporary Direct Support (TDS) beneficiaries was
created for pregnant and lactating women (PLW) or malnourished children’s caregivers, who were
Public Works participants. Pregnant and lactating women (PLW) and malnourished children’s caregivers
will temporarily move from Public Works (PW) into Temporary Direct Support (TDS).
The new round of PSNP also introduces co-responsibilities for TDS beneficiaries, aiming to improve
their take-up of health and education services. Finally, PSNP4 also allows malnourished children’s
caregivers from outside of the programme to move into TDS for duration of the period during which
the child is assessed as malnourished.
The Integrated Nutrition Social Cash Transfer (IN-SCT) pilot project is embedded within PSNP4 and
aims to test a case management model to optimise the innovations within PSNP4 and maximize
impacts for DS beneficiaries, particularly with respect to child nutrition. The pilot is supported by

12 The full targeting process includes geographical targeting of food insecure districts by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Security Directorate, followed by community-based targeting of food insecure households within selected districts.

24

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

UNICEF and is implemented in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), Ministry of
Education (MoE), Ministry of Health (MoH) and the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (MoLSA) in
two woredas (districts) in two regions in Ethiopia, namely Oromia and SNNP. It involves social workers
and community-based structures in providing case management and setting up linkages between
services for PDS and TDS beneficiaries. The pilot commenced in early 2016 and aimed to develop and
test the coordination between the three parties (MoA, MoH and MoLSA) at different administrative
levels in terms of information sharing, case management and capacity building. It also includes the
implementation of nutrition-sensitive interventions such as the rehabilitation of existing Farmer
Training Centres (FCTs), establishment of nutrition clubs at schools and school gardens. These
interventions are implemented Concern Worldwide. The lessons drawn from this pilot will inform the
design and implementation of the future National Nutrition Programme (NNP), the next phase of the
PSNP and the National Social Protection Policy and Strategy (UNICEF, 2014).
In so doing, the IN-SCT pilot aims to achieve increased uptake of social services by PDS and TDS
households; improve knowledge, attitudes and practices of PDS and TDS households regarding
nutritional, sanitary, health, child protection and educational behaviour; and increase understanding of
the roles and responsibilities of actors such as social workers and community-based committees in
achieving improved outcomes (Schubert, 2015).
In terms of this case study, we explore the ‘plus’ components as introduced within PSNP4 and in light
of the specific implementation modality of IN-SCT.

4.2. ‘Cash plus’ components
PSNP4 and the IN-SCT pilot include a comprehensive package of ‘plus’ components in recognition of
the need for a comprehensive approach to achieve positive impacts, including participation in nutritionsensitive activities, supplementary feeding, psycho-social support and coordinating linkages to services
(Schubert 2015). We discuss two main components – one that is integral to PNSP4 at large, namely
Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) and improvement of knowledge – and one that is specific to
the IN-SCT pilot, namely the implementation modality predicated on a system of case management
and referrals.
BCC and improvement of knowledge
An important component of the programme’s theory of change focuses on increasing participants’
knowledge in order to change attitudes and practices towards improved outcomes for children,
particularly with respect to nutrition but also sanitation, health and child protection measures
(Schubert, 2015). To promote health-seeking behaviour and improved child-care practices, and to
increase the PSNP’s nutritional impact, Public Works participants (both male and female) are required
to participate in behavioural change communication (BCC) sessions on nutrition and related topics
while working on public works projects (Schubert, 2015). Participation in such sessions replace
participation in a public works session. They are complemented with wider community conversations,
activities in school clubs, and integration of messaging in the school curriculum (UNICEF, 2016). BCC
activities make use of existing tools for promoting good nutrition, health and sanitation practice as
already used by Health Extension Workers (HEWs) where available; otherwise existing materials may
be adapted or new materials are developed (UNICEF, 2016). BCC sessions are implemented under the
guidelines of the MOH. Direct Support beneficiaries will be exposed to BCC through their direct contact
with HEWs in line with co-responsibilities.

25

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

Case management and referrals
PSNP4 introduces ‘co-responsibilities’ for Temporary Direct Support (TDS) beneficiaries. Within the
IN-SCT pilot, social workers are pivotal in administering and monitoring the co-responsibilities. Social
workers in collaboration with officers from the relevant sector ministries and with the ground level
committees (Health Development Army, Social Development Committee and the Community Care
Coalition (CCC) or Community-Based Social Protection Committee (CBSPC)) at woreda and kebele
(sub-district) levels, to determine what co-responsibilities are appropriate depending on the availability
of easily accessible basic services (UNICEF, 2014).
Importantly, PSNP4 does not provide health and other social services directly, but the Government of
Ethiopia has invested in the supply-side to facilitate increased uptake of these services on the demandside. Local-level staff – Development Agents (DAs), Health Extension Workers (HEWs), and Social
Workers (SWs) – interact directly with PSNP participants, advising them and linking them to services,
for instance by referring individuals to relevant health services (see Table 1). Social Workers have
specific responsibilities to ensure that PSNP participants move between Public Works and Direct
Support as indicated, and to monitor co-responsibilities and engage with households that have
difficulties with compliance. They are also tasked with strengthening community-based mechanisms
and providing psycho-social support to programme participants (Schubert, 2015).

Table 1: Overview of tasks for DA, HEW and SW
Development Agent (DA)
 Select and design Public Works projects in line with prioritised community needs
 Oversee the implementation of Public Works projects
 Prepare PSNP attendance and payments lists
 Support business plan development for participants pursuing the crop and livestock livelihood
pathway
 Provide technical assistance and mentoring to participants who receive livelihood transfers
Health Extension Worker (HEW)

 Participate with local Food Security Task Forces (FSTF) in PSNP targeting, and the graduation
process
 Identify households with malnourished children and refer them to PSNP for Temporary Direct
Support
 Plan implementation of behaviour change communication (BCC) in collaboration with local DA
 Provide behaviour change communication (BCC) on nutrition, hygiene and sanitation to PSNP
clients
 Track attendance of PSNP Temporary Direct Support clients at health centres and participation in
BCC
SCT Social Worker (SW)
 Strengthen the capacity of Community-Based Social Protection Committees (CBSPC)
 Collect Permanent Direct Support (PDS) and Temporary Direct Support (TDS) beneficiaries of the PSNP
 Enhance access of vulnerable community members to services (health, education, social, justice)
 Provide psycho-social support to PDS and TDS households and other highly vulnerable people
 Manage the cases of SCT clients who are not complying with their co-responsibilities
Source: Schubert 2015: Annex 7b and Annex 8

26

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

4.3. Explaining success
As the implementation of this IN-SCT pilot only commenced early 2016 and is still underway at the time
of writing, the assessment of success factors for implementation will be based on the baseline study of
the overall evaluation. This study was undertaken a few months into programme implementation
(Gilligan et al. 2016).
Baseline findings revealed that PSNP participants have good knowledge of appropriate child feeding
practices and high self-reported rates of exclusive breastfeeding. The baseline fieldwork also found
high levels of knowledge, attitudes and practises on hand-washing, and on use of latrines and toilets
rather than open defecation (Gilligan et al. 2016). The most likely explanation for these positive findings
is that Health Extension Workers (HEWs) and Development Agents (DAs) have already been posted in
local communities for several years, spreading messages about good child care, nutrition and
sanitation practices which have been widely adopted. Both quantitative and qualitative findings from
the baseline survey indicate that HEWs provide strong support to PLW, with 78 per cent of women
having received some form of antenatal care during their last pregnancy, and that HEWs have been
instrumental in disseminating knowledge about good nutrition (Gilligan et al. 2016). One challenge
identified in the baseline was access to clean drinking water – this was a drought year in the study
communities, and drinking water was far away and/or expensive for many households. While the
IN-SCT includes a small component of water source development in its package of nutrition-sensitive
interventions implemented by Concern Worldwide, the remit of support is too limited to address this
challenge.
Given the pivotal role of social workers in implementing co-responsibilities and establishing linkages to
other social services, their performance is a key component for success of the pilot. Experiences with
respect to social workers have been mixed since the start of the pilot. PDS and TDS beneficiaries in
SNNP region appeared more aware of who the SWs were and received more support compared to
beneficiaries in Oromia region (Gilligan et al. 2016). These mixed experiences across regions are also
reflected in beneficiaries’ perceptions of collaboration across SWs, DAs and HEWs, with beneficiaries
from SNNP region pointing towards a truly integrated and collaborative approach. A potential
explanation for the regional discrepancies is that Oromia also employs government para-social
workers, who were already in post before the start of the IN-SCT pilot and have agreed to share
responsibilities with the IN-SCT project social workers. No government social workers are in place in
SNNP region, which may be reflected in lower levels of outreach and capacity on behalf of social
workers. Social workers across both regions reported facing logistical constraints in performing their
jobs, most notably lack of suitable means of transportation (Gilligan et al. 2016). Also, although it is
part of their job description, few social workers had engaged in the provision of psycho-social support
as a result of logistical and capacity constraints.
The fourth phase of PSNP includes a number of innovations, some of which require strong
collaboration across sectors. Most notably, the transition of pregnant and lactating women (PLW) and
of caregivers of malnourished children from Public Works to Temporary Direct Support requires DAs,
HEWs and SWs to work together. Early findings from the qualitative baseline survey suggest that
transitions of caregivers of malnourished children only occurred sporadically in the first year of
implementation. Transitions of PLW have occurred but often with a high degree of confusion regarding
roles and responsibilities as part of this process. Factors playing into these issues include lack of
knowledge on behalf of HEWs and DAs as well as lack of commitment. While knowledge of procedures
associated with new components of PNSP4 and modality of implementation as part of the IN-SCT pilot

27

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

was high among staff directly linked to the IN-SCT pilot – notably the social workers and programme
coordinators – detailed knowledge was less widespread among DAs and HEWs. Particularly HEWs
appeared to have limited awareness of PSNP innovations at large and those relevant to their work –
including the transitions of PLW and caregivers of malnourished children from PW to TDS. Similarly,
commitment to collaboration was identified as limited among sectors without direct involvement in
PSNP and the IN-SCT (Gilligan et al. 2016).

4.4. Lessons learned
i. Strong long-standing supply of services is crucial for achieving impact in areas of health, nutrition
and positive behaviour change. The local-level presence of HEWs in communities across Ethiopia
has greatly improved knowledge regarding positive health, nutrition and hygiene practices for
children and has ensured the percolation of health care to the majority of the population. Building
on and strengthening the supply of services is crucial for the achievement of positive impacts
following referral to services.
ii. Successful case management and referral hinge on a well-trained and well-resourced cadre of social
workers. While collaboration across sectors requires the involvement of staff from different sectors,
social workers represent the focal persons maintaining oversight and overall responsibility for
linking beneficiaries to services and following up on their use. The availability of ample resources
and practical means are crucial for social workers to perform their tasks successfully.
iii. Cross-sectoral linkages to services requires strong knowledge and commitment of roles and
responsibilities on behalf of all parties involved. The lack of knowledge and limited degree of
commitment within the health sector appears to form an impediment to the successful
establishment of linkages between programme components and across services.
iv. For ‘cash plus’ programmes to achieve its intended impacts, its components need to provide or link
to relevant services that assist beneficiaries in overcoming key obstacles towards improved
outcomes. IN-SCT invests heavily in creating awareness to affect behaviour change while
knowledge about feeding, health and hygiene practices is already high. At the same time, lack of
access to water – a main barrier to improving nutrition, health and hygiene practices – is only
addressed in limited manner.

5. CRITERIA FOR SUCCESS AND CHALLENGES AHEAD
This section summarizes the main lessons learned regarding successful implementation of ‘cash plus’
components from the three case studies above, and documentation from other programmes where
available. We identify lessons learned for the implementation of ‘cash plus’ components integral and
external to cash transfer programmes, as per the ‘cash plus’ menu presented in Figure 1. While many
of these lessons refer to the design and implementation of social protection more generally, we focus
specifically on issues regarding the provision of complementary support and cross-sectoral linkages.

28

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

5.1. Politics matter
Political commitment is crucial for forging relationships between implementing ministries and
institutions, and for committing the necessary resources for operationalising linkages between
programmes and services. The Ghana case study exemplifies the crucial role of political leadership in
affecting change. It highlights how personal commitment by political champions such as the Minister
and President can act as a catalyst for implementing programme linkages. A similar observation can be
made for the Chile case study, where the instalment of the new President formed an important impetus
in the fight against extreme poverty and the establishment of Chile Solidario. The importance of
political advocates has also been noted elsewhere. In Kenya and Brazil, for example, champions within
the respective ministries were considered crucial for driving capacity-building, scale-up and
coordination of programmes across sectors (EC, 2015: 38).
The Ghana case study also highlighted how political dynamics in reference to elections and electoral
incentives can provide impetus to a process of linking beneficiaries across sectors. Indeed, politics and
the way in which social protection interacts with political processes is widely recognized as a key driver
in determining the shape and scope of individual programmes and wider social protection systems
(Hickey, 2007). Social protection can be instrumental to establishing political settlements in any given
country (Lavers and Hickey, 2015).
While the need for political commitment and importance of political dynamics holds for the expansion
and sustainability of social protection interventions in general, their role is compounded with respect to
‘cash plus’ programming. The integration of additional components and facilitation of access to
services across sectors do not merely require a strong push from within the social welfare sector and
negotiations with the Ministry of Finance; they also call for engagement with and creation of
commitment across social sectors.

5.2. Formal agreements are a necessary foundation
Formal cross-institutional agreements provide a fundamental foundation for operationalising crosssectoral linkages. The experience in Ghana demonstrates the importance of a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) that clearly delineates the roles and responsibilities of each implementing
agency, allowing the linkages between LEAP and NHIS to become actionable. In Chile, legislative
frameworks vitally underpinned the coordination of services across sectors. While they do not present
a sufficient condition for change in and of themselves, they form the necessary foundation for action
when leadership and resources are available.
The role that legal frameworks and social protection strategies can play has also been recognized by
Kaltenborn et al. (2017). Their review of legal and policy documents underpinning existing social
protection schemes found that social protection strategies, and particularly the processes through
which they are formulated, can galvanise action and serve as a frame of reference for building social
protection systems. National legislation underpinning social protection policy is crucial for holding
government to account for its statutory obligations for providing a basic level of income security and
services to its citizens. As a case in point, South Africa has long been hailed for its rights-based
approach to social protection policies, while Kenya provides an example of how the establishment of
policy and legislative frameworks can support shifts towards a social protection system (ibid). Again,
the existence of such frameworks is important for social protection as a whole but is particularly vital
for establishing cross-sectoral collaboration and providing accountability frameworks across sectors.

29

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

5.3. Awareness and engagement of all stakeholders is imperative for coordination
Lessons from both Ghana and Ethiopia point towards the importance of staff at all levels having
detailed knowledge of and commitment to programmes’ ‘plus’ components for their success.
Experiences in Ethiopia show that awareness of ‘plus’ components was comparatively low among
service staff that are most removed or indirectly involved in the implementation of the social protection
intervention. While the development agents and social workers were relatively well aware of
programme guidelines and their roles within programme processes, the health extension workers had
poor knowledge of the linkages between different components of the PSNP and their role in
establishing such linkages, which hampered their implementation.
Coordination at programme and policy level is crucial for creating effective programme linkages (UNICEF
and WB, 2013). Chile Solidario’s umbrella function, overarching the Puente and other programmes, is
deemed to be a key factor in its success to integrate cash transfers with other services (ibid). Sub-national
and local level efforts underpin any such integration. In Ghana, regular engagements between staff from
across sectors were found helpful in promoting knowledge on programme-specific criteria and fostering
collaboration. Regular meetings and engagements on the ground between LEAP and NHIS programme
staff at local and district level were considered vital to the recent success in expanding the registration of
cash transfer beneficiaries into the health insurance system.

5.4. Personalized approaches require a skilled workforce and ‘the right person in the
right place’
An important part of the appeal and positive effect of ‘plus’ components such as psycho-social support
and case management is their tailored response taking into account household-specific and individual
issues of concern. A large part of Chile Solidario’s success can be attributed to the support of skilled
social workers that provided programme beneficiaries with a tailored response that helped them
overcome personal barriers and navigate a complex system of social services. In Ethiopia, more
personalized responses to beneficiaries’ and their households’ needs were the core of the IN-SCT
pilot’s theory of change, aimed at galvanizing the impact of cash transfers with respect to nutrition and
health outcomes. The benefit of intense and personalized responses has also been recognized in
parenting support programming (Engle et al. 2011) and ‘graduation’ programming (Roelen and
Devereux, 2017).
The provision of more personalized approaches within cash transfers holds strong implications with
respect to human resource requirements. Firstly, it demands a skilled and qualified cadre of social
service workers. These can include professional or paraprofessional social workers, child and youth
workers or community workers (see Global Social Service Workforce Alliance, 2015). The social service
workforce in most low- and middle-income countries is highly strained suffering staff shortages and
qualification gaps (ibid), making the development of a qualified social service workforce a top priority
for advancing ‘cash plus’ interventions. Secondly, the provision of more tailored and personalised
approaches also requires ‘the right persons to be in the right places’ and to offer appropriate support.
While the provision of psycho-social support – such as within Chile Solidario and the IN-SCT in Ethiopia
– requires well-trained social workers, the administrative processes of application and transfers
payments could be implemented by a cadre of administrative staff. Yet many programmes that aim to
provide more comprehensive support beyond cash alone tend to focus narrowly on social workers as
implementers of a wide set of programme activities, ranging from social support to data entry (Roelen
et al. 2016a).

30

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

At the other end of the spectrum there is also heavy reliance on community volunteers as a way of
increasing community participation, filling capacity gaps and offering a cheaper alternative to the
employment formal social service providers. The reliance on community volunteer structures has
proven to be crucial for the effective implementation of programmes in Kenya and Zambia, for
example, but are also feared to be unsustainable (Kardan et al. 2016). Effective implementation for
‘cash plus’ interventions therefore calls for creative and sustainable human resource solutions that
build on a formal workforce, with appropriate division of tasks and responsibilities.

5.5. Establishment of linkages to services across sectors requires case management
Case management will be crucial for the effective implementation of ‘cash plus’ interventions in terms
of their facilitation of access to and use of services. Experiences in Chile and Ethiopia clearly indicate
that effective linkages to services requires mechanisms overseeing the referral to services, monitoring
of the use of such services and follow-up in cases of non-take-up. Operationalizing such mechanisms
requires a focal point with clear responsibility and oversight over individual cases with a mandate to
ensure support from across sectoral services (Roelen et al. 2012). Such focal points – by
communicating procedures, roles and responsibilities – ensure coherence and consistency on behalf of
the service providers. They perform a similar function on behalf of the programme participants – by
assessing household needs and identifying effective responses (ibid).
Chile Solidario is a case in point for highlighting the importance of case management. It has been
widely applauded for its ability to act as an umbrella and refer families and their children to appropriate
programmes and services (see EC, 2015). Experiences from other low-income countries also point
towards the potential of case management approaches. The Community Case Management (CCM)
approach in Mozambique intends to bridge social protection and child protection services, working
with Child Protection Community Committees (CPCCs) for the identification of and response to
vulnerable children and their needs (Roelen, 2011). Successful case management and integration of
programmes across sectors at scale will also depend on implementation of MISs.
In Latin American countries, the provision of an integrated response with clear coordination
mechanisms involved the decentralisation of services to ensure greater streamlining of the supply side.
In Chile, the reorganisation of public services – including the devolution of mandates and
responsibilities to subnational level – proved vital for strengthening collaboration between
implementing agencies from different sectors. Similar models of decentralized delivery can be
observed in Brazil and Mexico (EC, 2015).

5.6. Greater ambitions need to be matched with greater resources
While the implementation of ‘plus’ components with links to multiple services can increase their impact,
there are important resource implications. ‘Plus’ components can be expensive, particularly when aiming
to link social protection beneficiaries to a range of services and offer monitoring and follow-up support.
The Ghana case study provides a pertinent example of how the commitment of financial resources
proved the necessary catalyst for action in registering LEAP beneficiaries with the NHIS.
Financial implications of more comprehensive packages also feature heavily in debates about
‘graduation’ programming (Banerjee et al. 2015). Despite heavy resource requirements associated with
the implementation of integrated approaches, the majority of programmes appear cost-effective (ibid).
The importance of sufficient funds being allocated towards programme administration is illustrated by

31

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

the Pantawid Pamilya Pilipino Programme (PPPP) in the Philippines. This is an example of a strict
spending cap on administrative costs, which causes frontline staff to be overloaded and severely limits
their ability to successfully administer the programme or provide support beyond cash (Schelzig, 2017).
Enthusiasm for ‘cash plus’ interventions thus needs to go hand-in-hand with a realistic understanding
of resource requirements in order to adequately plan and implement resource mobilisation strategies.

5.6. Demand-side interventions needs to be matched with supply-side investments
All case studies clearly highlighted that ‘cash plus’ interventions can only be successful when services
are widely available and of high quality. Low quality of health care was considered an impeding factor
for achieving positive impacts from the LEAP-NHIS complementarity in Ghana. Supply-side constraints
were also found to be a key factor in undermining Chile Solidario’s impact. In Ethiopia, nutrition and
hygiene practices for children were severely hampered by the lack of clean drinking water as a result of
the drought.
The need for demand induced by ‘cash plus’ schemes to be matched with high-quality supply of
services for achieving impact was also discussed by Ulrichs and Roelen (2012) in reference to the
Oportunidades CCT scheme in Mexico. They argue that the programme fails to affect positive change
for indigenous people in part due to the low quality of educational and other services. In terms of the
PPPP in the Philippines, supply-side constraints and low quality of services in education and health
were found to impede positive impacts of the programme, particularly with respect to immunization
(Chaudhury et al. 2013). This need for supply-side investments to make ‘cash plus’ interventions
effective compounds the need for the mobilisation of political will and formal agreements that were
mentioned earlier, as they form the foundation of advocacy for such investments.

5.7. ‘Cash plus’ components need to be fit-for-purpose
Finally, ‘cash plus’ interventions need to respond to the need in an appropriate way. In Ethiopia, for
example, the theory of change in the IN-SCT attributes high rates of stunting to lack of knowledge.
However, the baseline survey found that knowledge about dietary and hygiene practice is generally
high and that other factors – such as lack of clean water – play a significant role in preventing people
from putting knowledge into practice. A heavy focus on BCC and knowledge creation may therefore
have a much smaller effect than anticipated. ‘Cash plus’ can provide a powerful approach to
maximising impacts of cash transfers, but only if accompanied with a sense of realism and pragmatism
about an appropriate and feasible response to the pressing challenges at hand.
The Foster Child Grant (FCG) in South Africa presents a case in point. As receipt of the grant goes
hand-in-hand with regular monitoring and supervision by social workers and placement reviews by the
courts, the social work and judicial systems are under great pressure with delays and payment arrears
as a result. While the programme was originally designed as a child protection mechanism, many
children living without their biological parents have turned the FCG into a de facto poverty reduction
scheme, calling in question the need for social worker assessments and follow-up for all cases (Roelen
et al. 2016b). More generally, the notion of ‘cash plus’ presupposes a centrality of cash transfers that
may not be appropriate in all contexts. While poverty and lack of income presents a key barrier to
achieving second-order impacts, other obstacles might be more pertinent, calling for cash transfers to
take a more supportive role. With respect to Chile Solidario, cash transfers were only secondary to its
prime programme components of psycho-social support and facilitation of access to other services
(Cecchini et al. 2012). In light of the multi-faceted nature of poverty, the provision of tailored guidance

32

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

and positive support was considered most important to assist extremely poor families. Cash transfers
acted as support or incentive for facilitating behaviour change.

CONCLUSION
This paper aimed to identify key factors for success for the implementation of increasingly popular
‘cash plus’ programmes, based on (i) a review of the emerging evidence base of ‘cash plus’
interventions and (ii) an examination of three case studies, namely Chile Solidario in Chile, IN-SCT in
Ethiopia and LEAP in Ghana. The analysis was guided by a conceptual framework proposing a menu of
‘cash plus’ components. The menu distinguishes between components that are integral to cash transfer
programming – additional or in-kind benefits, information/ sensitization/ and behavioural change, and
specialized case management – and others that are external to cash transfer programming – provision
of access to services, and facilitating linkages to services.
Analysis of the case studies provides key lessons learned for effective implementation of ‘cash plus’
programmes. These include policy level factors; namely the importance of political champions in
advocating in favour of social protection and ‘cash plus’ programmes in particular and the
establishment of formal agreements, programme level factors; namely the need for awareness and
engagement on behalf of all parties, the availability of a skilled and appropriate workforce, the use of
case management, and the availability of greater resources, and supply-side level factors; namely the
greater investments in availability and quality of services and potentially reorganization of services.
Finally, ‘cash plus’ interventions should be ‘fit-for-purpose’ – in other words, their components should
be appropriate for their intended purpose. This may mean that cash transfers take centre stage or that
they exist in support of other more prominent components, such as in Chile Solidario.
The assessment of three case studies indicated that effective implementation of ‘cash plus’
components has indeed contributed to greater impacts of the respective programmes. It has thereby
addressed some of the non-financial and structural barriers that poor people face and has reinforced
the positive effects of cash transfer programmes. The analysis also highlights the ways in which ‘cash
plus’ programming can make access to services more ‘pro-poor’. This is done through explicit efforts
to include the poor and most marginalized – going further than simply lifting their financial constraints.
Both integral and external ‘cash plus’ components enable services to be more pro-poor. In Ghana, the
poorest segments of the population are automatically enrolled in the NHIS. In Chile, vulnerable groups
gained knowledge of and received preferential access to a set of social programmes at local level. In
Ethiopia, the poorest members of the community receive coordinated support from trained social
workers.
We conclude by reflecting more broadly on the programmes’ increasingly ambitious theories of
change, and the need for more innovative monitoring and evaluation.
While there is no doubt that a more holistic approach to social protection programming can achieve
greater impacts, there is a need for critical realism about the extent to which interventions targeting
households and individuals can achieve positive change in contexts of addressing widespread poverty,
inequality and power imbalance. While the rationale of ‘cash plus’ interventions explicitly recognizes

33

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

the need for supply-side investments, positive change remains predicated on the notion of individual
action rather than structural change.
Furthermore, the exploration of success factors for the implementation of ‘cash plus’ components at
large should not make us disregard the constraints faced by the most vulnerable and how such
constraints can be overcome. All the programmes explored in this paper suffered from challenges in
reaching marginalized groups, and ensuring full participation in cash transfer programmes and
opportunities for making use of their ‘plus’ components should be a key concern when designing and
implementing ‘cash plus’ programmes. The issue of conditionality is a case in point: while conditions
are often introduced in explicit recognition of non-financial barriers, they may produce exclusion
errors, impose greater costs on beneficiaries because compliance is compulsory, and undermine the
idea of social protection as a right
Finally, while we presented an overview of evidence providing testimony to the importance of ‘cash
plus’ programming, the evidence base remains relatively thin. The research on cash transfers plus
complementary interventions is inadequate and more is needed to fill this gap (De Hoop and Rosati,
2014). The need for more innovative monitoring and evaluation is two-fold. Firstly, there is need for a
greater understanding of the impact of the many variations of ‘cash plus’ programming. This includes
evidence on the comparative roles of individual ‘plus’ components, requiring the disentanglement of
income and behaviour effects as well as the knowledge, attitudes and behaviour pathways affording
such effects. It also includes acknowledgement that such programmes are often implemented as a
‘package’ – with cash transfers either taking a central or secondary role – making it impossible or
undesirable to examine the impacts of each component in isolation.
Future evaluations thus need to strike a balance between applying more complex evaluation protocols
to investigate the contributions of individual components, while recognizing that the success of ‘cash
plus’ programmes may well be about the total being greater than the sum of its parts. In addition, the
need for more insight into how greater impacts can be achieved, calls for more in-depth and rigorous
process evaluations that unravel programme processes and stakeholder engagement in programme
implementation. This paper begins to fill this knowledge gap, though much more remains to be done.

34

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

REFERENCES: GENERAL
Adato, M., and Bassett, L. (2012). Social Protection and Cash Transfers to Strengthen Families Affected
by HIV and AIDS. Washington DC.: IFPRI.
Ahmed, A., Hoddinott, J., Roy, S., Sraboni, E., Quabili, W. and Margolies, A. (2016), Which kinds of
social safety net transfers work best for the ultra poor in Bangladesh? Operation and impacts of
the Transfer Modality Research Initiative. Dhaka: IFPRI and World Food Programme.
Attah, R., Barca, V., Kardan, A., MacAuslan, I., Merttens, F., and Pellerano, L. (2016). Can Social
Protection Affect Psychosocial Wellbeing and Why Does This Matter? Lessons from Cash
Transfers in Sub-Saharan Africa. The Journal of Development Studies, 52(8), 1115-1131.
Baird, S., Ferreira, F. H., Özler, B., and Woolcock, M. (2013). Relative effectiveness of conditional and
unconditional cash transfers for schooling outcomes in developing countries: a systematic
review. Campbell systematic reviews, 9(8).
Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., Goldberg, N., Karlan, D., Osei, R., Parienté, W., Shapiro, J., Thuysbaert, B. and
Udry, C. (2015). A multifaceted program causes lasting progress for the very poor: Evidence from
six countries. Science, 348(6236). doi:10.1126/science.1260799
Barca, V. and Chirchir, R. (2014). Single registries and integrated MISs: De-mystifying data and
information management concepts. Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade: Barton, Australia.
Barrientos, A., Byrne, J., Peña, P. et al. (2014). Social transfers and child protection in the South.
Children and Youth Services Review, 47, Part 2, 105-112. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
childyouth.2014.07.011
Bastagli, F., Hagen-Zanker, J., Harman, L., Barca, V., Sturge, G., Schmidt, T., and Pellerano, L. (2016).
Cash transfers: what does the evidence say? A rigorous review of programme impact and of the
role of design and implementation features. London: ODI.
Berhane, G., Devereux, S., Hoddinott, J., Nega Tegebu, F., Roelen, K., and Schwab, B. (2012). Evaluation
of the Social Cash Transfers Pilot Programme, Tigray Region, Ethiopia. Baseline Report.
Washington DC: IFPRI.
Blattman, C., Jamison, J. C. and Sheridan, M. (2017). Reducing Crime and Violence: Experimental
Evidence from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in Liberia. American Economic Review, 107(4),
1165-1206.
Blouin C., Bhushan, A., Murphy, S. and Warren, B. (2007). Trade liberalisation: Synthesis Papers.
Globalisation and Health Knowledge Network: Research Paper 4. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
Browne, E. (2013). Theories of Change for Cash Transfers. Retrieved from Birmingham:
Chaudhury, N., Friedman, J. and Onishi, J. (2013). Philippines Conditional Cash Transfer Program
Impact Evaluation 2012. Report Number 75533-PH. Washington DC: World Bank.
Cluver, L. D., Orkin, F. M., Boyes, M. E., and Sherr, L. (2014). Cash plus care: social protection
cumulatively mitigates HIV-risk behaviour among adolescents in South Africa. AIDS, 28,
S389-S397.

35

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

Davis, B., Handa, S., Hypher, N., Winder Rossi, N., Winters, P., and Yablonski, J. (Eds.). (2016). From
Evidence to Action: The Story of Cash Transfers and Impact Evaluation in Sub Saharan Africa.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Hoop, J., and Rosati, F. (2013). Cash Transfers and Child Labor. IZA DP No. 7496. Bonn, Germany:
IZA.
de Montesquiou, A. and Sheldon, T. (2014). From Extreme Poverty to Sustainable Livelihoods: A
Technical Guide to the Graduation Approach. Washington DC: CGAP and Ford Foundation.
Devereux, S. and Sabates, R. (2016). Enhancing the Productive Capacity of Extremely Poor People in
Rwanda: Final Evaluation Report. Brighton: Centre for Social Protection, Institute of Development
Studies.
Devereux, S., Roelen, K., Sabates, R., Stoelinga, D. and Dyevre, A. (2015). Concern’s Graduation Model
Programme in Burundi: Final Evaluation Report. Brighton: Centre for Social Protection, Institute
of Development Studies.
Devereux, S., and Sabates-Wheeler, R. (2004). Transformative social protection. IDS Working Paper,
(232). Brighton.
Engle, P. L., Fernald, L. C. H., Alderman, H., Behrman, J., O’Gara, C., Yousafzai, A. and Iltus, S. (2011).
Strategies for reducing inequalities and improving developmental outcomes for young children
in low-income and middle-income countries. The Lancet, 378(9799), 1339-1353.
EC (2015). Supporting Social Protection Systems. Concept Paper No. 4. Brussels: Directorate-General
for International Cooperation and Development. European Commission.
FAO. (2015). The State of Food and Agriculture 2015. Rome: FAO.
Gatenio Gabel, S. (2012). Social protection and children in developing countries. Children and Youth
Services Review, 34(3), 537-545.
Global Social Service Workforce Alliance (2015). The State of the Social Workforce 2015 Report. A
multi-country review. Washington, DC.: Global Social Service Workforce Alliance.
Handa, S., Peterman, A., Seidenfeld, D., and Tembo, G. (2016). Income Transfers and Maternal Health:
Evidence from a National Randomized Social Cash Transfer Program in Zambia. Health
Economics, 25(2), 225-236.
Hickey, S. (2007). Conceptualising the Politics of Social Protection in Africa. Manchester: Brooks World
Poverty Institute (BWPI), The University of Manchester.
Jones, N., and Marquez, E. V. (2014). Is cash the answer? Lessons for child protection programming
from Peru: The Juntos (Together) program has the potential to improve children’s care and
protection. Child Abuse & Neglect, 38(3), 383-394.
Kaltenborn, M., Abdul-Gafaru, A., Roelen, K. and Hague, S. (2017) The Influence of Policy and Legal
Frameworks on the Development of National Social Protection Systems (with a special focus on
the Ghanaian system). Florence: UNICEF Office of Research – Innocenti (forthcoming).

36

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

Kardan, A., Wyatt, A., Quarles van Ufford, P. and Attah, R. (2016). Assessing the capacity of local
administration and community structures to deliver social protection programmes. Presented at
the Symposium on Social Protection Systems - Tying the Knots, 5-6 September 2017, Bonn,
Germany.
Lagarde, M., Haines, A. and Palmer, N. (2007). Conditional cash transfers for improving uptake of health
interventions in low-and middle-income countries: a systematic review. Journal of the American
Medical Association (JAMA), 298(16), 1900-1910.
Lamadrid-Figueroa, H., Ángeles, G., Mroz, T., Urquieta-Salomon, J., Hernandez-Prado, B., Cruz-Valdez,
A., and Téllez-Rojo, M. M. (2010). Heterogeneous impact of the social programme Oportunidades
on use of contraceptive methods by young adult women living in rural areas. Journal of
development effectiveness, 2(1), 74-86.
Langendorf, C., Roederer, T., de Pee, S., Brown, D., Doyon, S., Mamaty, A-A., Toure, L.W.,
Manzo, M.L. and Grais, R.F. (2014). Preventing acute malnutrition among young children in crises: a
prospective intervention study in Niger, PloS Medicine 11 (9): e1001714.
Lavers, T. and Hickey, S. (2015). Investigating the political economy of social protection expansion in
Africa: At the intersection of transnational ideas and domestic politics. ESID Working Paper No.
47. Manchester: IDPM, The University of Manchester.
Manley, J., Gitter, S., and Slavchevska, V. (2013). How effective are cash transfers at improving
nutritional status? World Development, 48, 133-155.
Miller, E. and Samson, M. (2012) HIV-sensitive Social Protection: State of the Evidence 2012 in subSaharan Africa. Commissioned by UNICEF and produced by the Economic Policy Research
Institute, Cape Town.
Molyneux, M., Jones, W. N., and Samuels, F. (2016). Can Cash Transfer Programmes Have
‘Transformative’ Effects? Journal of Development Studies, 52(8), 1087-1098. doi:10.1080/0022038
8.2015.1134781
Palermo, T., Veras Soares F. and Yablonksi, J. “Overview of Cash Plus and Systems Linkages.”
Presentation to 8th Transfer Project Workshop, Dakar, Senegal, 7 June 2017.
Richter, L., and Naicker, S. (2013). A Review of Published Literature on Supporting and Strengthening
Child-Caregiver Relationships (Parenting). Retrieved from Arlington, VA.
Roelen, K. and Devereux, S. (2017). Money or the Message. Brighton: forthcoming.
Roelen, K., Delap, E., Jones, C. and H. Karki Chettri (2016a). Improving child wellbeing and care in
Sub-Saharan Africa: The role of social protection. Children and Youth Services Review 73:
309-318.
Roelen, K., Karki-Chettri, H., Clulow, S., Jones, C., Saksena, P. and E. Delap (2016b). Researching the
Linkages between Social Protection and Children’s Care in South Africa, Family for Every Child/
IDS/ Children in Distress Network.
Roelen, K. (2014). Sticks or carrots? Conditional cash transfers and their effect on child abuse and
neglect: Researchers observe both benefits and harms of CCT programs. Child Abuse and
Neglect, 38(3), 372-382.

37

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

Roelen, K., Long, S., and Edstrom, J. (2012). Pathways to protection – referral mechanisms and case
management for vulnerable children in Eastern and Southern Africa. Lessons learned and ways
forward. Brighton: IDS/UNICEF ESARO.
Roelen, K. (2011). Referral Mechanisms and Case Management for Vulnerable Children in Eastern and
Souther Africa - Mozambique Country Case Study. Brighton: IDS.
Sabates-Wheeler, R. and Devereux, S. (2013). Sustainable graduation from social protection
programmes. Development and Change, 44(4): 911–938.
Schelzig, K. (2017) Social assistance case studies from Southeast Asia: The Pantawid Pamilyang
Pilipino conditional cash transfer program in the Philippines. Case study presentation in ADB
Technical Assistance 8836: Building Capacity for Enhanced Connectivity in Southeast Asia
Regional Training on Social Protection Systems: Social Assistance. 16-20 January 2017, ADB
Headquarters, Manila, Philippines.
Seidenfeld, D., Handa, S., Tembo, S., Michelo, S., Harland Scott, C. and Prencipe, L. (2014). The Impact
of an Unconditional Cash Transfer on Food Security and Nutrition: The Zambia Child Grant
Programme. Brighton: IDS.
Storey, D. and Figueroa, M. E. 2012). Toward a Global Theory of Health Behavior and Social Change
The Handbook of Global Health Communication (pp. 70-94): Wiley-Blackwell.
Ulrichs, M. and Roelen, K. (2012). Equal Opportunities for All? – A Critical Analysis of Mexico’s
Oportunidades. IDS Working Paper, 007. Brighton: IDS.
UNICEF and World Bank (2013). Common Ground: UNICEF and World Bank Approaches to Building
Social Protection Systems. New York/ Washington DC: UNICEF/World Bank.
Veras Soares, F., Knowles, M., Daidone, S., and Tirivayi, N. (2016). Combined effects and synergies
between agricultural and social protection interventions: what is the evidence so far? Rome: FAO.
Waisbord, S. and Obregon, R. (2012). Theoretical Divides and Convergence in Global Health
Communication The Handbook of Global Health Communication (pp. 7-33): Wiley-Blackwell.
Watson, C. and Palermo, T. (2016). Options for a ‘Cash Plus’ Intervention to Enhance Adolescent
Well-beingin Tanzania. An introduction and review of the evidence from different programme
models in Eastern and Southern Africa. Florence: UNICEF Office of Research – Innocenti.

38

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

REFERENCES: GHANA
Amuzu, C., Jones, N., and Perznieto, P. (2010). Gendered risks, poverty and vulnerability in Ghana: to
what extent is the LEAP cash transfer programme making a difference? London: Overseas
Development Institute.
Appiah, S. (2016). LEAP beneficiaries to receive GH¢11 million. Daily Graphic, 20 Jan 2016. Available at:
www.graphic.com.gh/news/general-news/leap-beneficiaries-to-receive-gh-11-million.html
[Accessed: 17 Oct 2016].
GoG (2007a). The National Social Protection Strategy: Investing in People. Accra: MESW.
GoG (2007b). Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP) Social Grants Pilot Implementation
Design. Volume 1 final draft. Accra: MESW.
GoG (2012). Ghana National Social Protection Strategy. Accra: Ministry of Gender, Children and Social
Protection.
GoG (2015). Implementation of the Ghana Shared Growth And Development Agenda (GSGDA) II,
2014-2017 2014 Annual Progress Report. Accra: National Development Planning Commission.
Gomez, C., Ghedemah, C., and Ragno, P. (2016). Social Protection System in Ghana: evolution, features
and enablers. Draft UNICEF Working Paper. Mimeo.
Handa, S. and Park, M. (2012). The impact of cash and health insurance on health care utilization in a
Developing Country.
Handa, S., Park, M., Darko, R., Osei-Akoto, I., Davis, B. and Daidone, S. (2013). Livelihood
Empowerment Against Poverty Program Impact Evaluation. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina, Carolina Population Center.
ILO (2014). Rationalising social protection expenditure in Ghana. Geneva: ILO.
Ministry of Employment and Social Welfare (MESW) (2012). Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty
(LEAP): Operations Manual. Accra: Ministry of Employment and Social Welfare.
Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection (2016), Programme Registers Beneficiaries on to the
National Health Insurance. Available at: http://www.ghana.gov.gh/index.php/media-center/
news/2937-leap-programme-registers-beneficiaries-onto-the-national-health-insurance-scheme-2.
NDC (2012). 2012 Manifesto: Advancing the Better Ghana Agenda. Accra: National Democratic Congress.
NHIA (2011). National Health Insurance Scheme Annual Report 2010. Accra: National Health Insurance
Authority.
Ragno, L. P., Hague, S., Handa, S., Ablo M., Twun-Danso, A., Ofori-Addo, L., Alviar, C., Davis, B.,
Pozarny, P., Attah, R. and Taylor, J. E. (2016). Social Protection and the Livelihood Empowerment
Against Poverty (LEAP) Programme in Ghana – Generating Poverty Change through the Power of
Evidence. In B. Davies, S. Handa, N. Hypher, N. W. Rissu, P. Winders and J. Yablonski (eds). From
Evidence to Action: The Story of Cash Transfers and Impact Evaluation in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schieber, G., Cheryl, C., Saleh, K and Lavado, R. (2012). Health Financing in Ghana. Washington, DC:
World Bank.

39

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

REFERENCES: CHILE
Amior, M., Carneiro, P., Galasso, E. and Ginja, R. (2012). Overcoming Barriers to the Take-Up of Social
Subsidies. In IZA/World Bank/OECD Conference on Activation and Employment Support Policies,
Istanbul, Turkey.
Asesorias para el Desarrollo (2005). Necesidades y Aspiraciones Prioritarias de las Familias que han
finalizado la etapa de apoyo psicosocial del sistema de protección social Chile Solidario.
Santiago, Chile.
Camacho, A., Cunningham, W., Rigolini, J. and V. Silva (2014). Addressing Access and Behavioral
Constraints through Social Intermediation Services: A Review of Chile Solidario and Red Unidos.
IZA Policy Papers 94. Bonn, Germany: Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Carneiro, P., Galasso, E. and R. Ginja (2009). The Impact of Providing Psycho-Social Support to Indigent
Families and Increasing their Access to Social Services: Evaluating Chile Solidario. Available at:
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/~uctprcp/chile.pdf
Carneiro, P. M., Galasso, E. and Ginja, R. (2015). Tackling social exclusion: evidence from Chile. World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (7180). Washington DC: World Bank.
Cecchini, S., Robles, C. and Vargas, L. H. (2012). The Expansion of Cash Transfers in Chile
and its Challenges: Ethical Family Income. IPC-IG Research Brief No. 26. Brasilia: International Policy
Centre for Inclusive Growth.
CEPAL (2003). Análisis de Resultados del Programa Puente 2002. Report, CEPAL, División Desarrollo
Social, Santiago.
Clert, C. (2000). Social Exclusion, Gender and the Chilean Government’s Anti-Poverty Strategy:
Priorities and Methods in Question. In Gacitua-Mario, E. and Sojo, C (eds.) Social Exclusion and
Poverty Reduction in Latin America. Washington DC: World Bank and FLACSO.
Galasso, E. and Carneiro, P. (2007). Conclusiones de la evaluación de Chile Solidario. Galerna. Available
at: http://www.galerna.cl/doc1
Government of Chile, Ministry of Planning/Solidarity and Social Investment Fund (2004). An
Introduction to: Chile Solidario - El Programa Puente. International Conference on Local
Development. World Bank. June 2004.
Hoces de la Guardia, F., Hojman, A. and Larranaga, O. (2011). Evaluating the Chile Solidario program:
results using the Chile Solidario panel and the administrative databases. Estudios de Economia,
38(1): 129-168.
Larranaga, O., Contreras, D. and Cabezas, G. (2015). Políticas Contra la Pobreza: de Chile Solidario al
Ingreso Ético Familiar. Santiago: UNDP Chile.
Martorano, B. and Sanfilippo, M. (2012). Innovative Features In Poverty Reduction Programmes: An
Impact Evaluation of Chile Solidario On Households And Children. Journal of International
Development, 24(8): 1030-1041.
MIDEPLAN (2002). Sistema Chile Solidario. Gobierno de Chile, Ministerio de Planificación y
Cooperación.

40

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

Palermo, T., Soares-Veras, F., and Yablonksi, J. (2017). Overview of Cash Plus and Systems Linkages.
Presentation to 8th Transfer Project Workshop, Dakar, Senegal, 7 June 2017.
Palma, J. and Urzúa, R. (2005). Anti-poverty Policies and Citizenry: The Chile Solidario Experience.
UNESCO, MOST-2 Policy Papers series.
Perticara, M. (2007). Análisis cuantitativo de impacto del Sistema Chile Solidario. Santiago: Mideplan.
Ruz, M.A. and Palma, J. (2005). Análisis del Proceso de Elaboración e Implementación del Sistema
Chile Solidario. Informe Preliminar. Instituto de Asuntos Públicos. Departamento de Políticas
Públicas. Santiago: Universidad de Chile.
Schulte, H. (2007). Chile Solidario: Toward an Integrated Approach to the Delivery of Social Protection.
Available at http://www.bettercarenetwork.org/library/social-welfare-systems/child-care-andprotection-policies/chile-solidario-toward-an-integrated-approach-to-the-delivery-of-socialprotection
Secretaría Ejecutiva de Protección Social (2009). Sistema de Protección Social Chile Solidario:
Satisfacción de usuarios y factores psicosociales. Available at: http://www.chilesolidario.gob.cl/
administrador/arc_doc/16238261524a65d082e883a.pdf
Sur Profesionales Consultores (2005). Evaluación de cinco programas de la oferta pública social,
participantes del Sistema Chile Solidario. Serie de Estudios Chile Solidario. Santiago: Mideplan.
Trucco D. and Nun, E. (2008). Sistematización de Evaluaciones Cualitativas del Programa Puente y
Sistema de Protección Chile Solidario. Santiago, Chile: PNUD
Universidad de Chile, Facultad de Ciencias Sociales (2004). Efectos de la Intervención Psicosocial en
Mujeres que participan directamente en el Sistema Chile Solidario. Santiago: Universidad de
Chile.

REFERENCES: ETHIOPIA
Berhane, G., Hoddinott,J., Kumar, N. and Seyoum Taffesse, A. (2011). The impact of Ethiopia’s
Productive Safety Nets and Household Asset Building Programme: 2006-2010. Washington DC:
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Devereux, S., R. Sabates-Wheeler, Mulugeta Tefera Taye, R. Sabates and Feyera Sima (2014).
Graduation from the Food Security Programme in Ethiopia: FAC Ethiopia final report. FAC
Working Paper, 080. Brighton: Future Agricultures Consortium.
Food Security Coordination Bureau (FSCB) (2007). Graduation Guidance Note. Addis Ababa: Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development, Government of Ethiopia.
Gilligan, D., Devereux, S., Hoddinott, J., Jilani, A., Kebede, D., Ledlie, N., Roelen, K. and Taffesse, A.
(2016). Impact Evaluation of the UNICEF Social Cash Transfer Pilot Program in Oromia and SNNP
Regions, Ethiopia: Baseline Survey Report. Washington DC: International Food Policy Research
Institute (IFPRI).
Sandford, J. et al. (2010). Ethiopia Productive Safety Net Programme: Assessment of Graduation
Report. Bristol: IDL group.

41

How to Make ‘Cash Plus’ Work: Linking Cash Transfers to Services and Sectors
Innocenti Working Paper 2017-10

Schubert, B. (2015). Regional States of Oromia and SNNPR, Agencies of Labour and Social Affairs:
Manual of Operations for the Social Cash Transfer Pilot Programs for Direct Support Clients.
Addis Ababa.
UNICEF (2014). Improved Nutrition through Integrated Basic Social Services with Social Cash Transfer
in SNNPR. Addis Ababa: UNICEF Ethiopia.
UNICEF (2016). Communication Strategy to Support the Integrated Nutrition and Social Cash Transfer
project interventions under PSNP4. Addis Ababa: UNICEF Ethiopia.
Baird, S., Ferreira, F. H., Özler, B., & Woolcock, M. (2013). Relative effectiveness of conditional and
unconditional cash transfers for schooling outcomes in developing countries: a systematic
review. Campbell systematic reviews, 9(8).
Barca, V., & Chirchir, R. (2014). Single registries and integrated MISs: De-mystifying data and
information management concepts. Retrieved from Barton, Australia:
Bastagli, F., Hagen-Zanker, J., Harman, L., Barca, V., Sturge, G., Schmidt, T., & Pellerano, L. (2016). Cash
transfers: what does the evidence say? A rigorous review of programme impact and of the role
of design and implementation features. Retrieved from Oxford:
Davis, B., Handa, S., Hypher, N., Winder Rossi, N., Winters, P., & Yablonski, J. (Eds.). (2016). From
Evidence to Action: The Story of Cash Transfers and Impact Evaluation in Sub Saharan Africa.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Hoop, J., & Rosati, F. (2013). Cash Transfers and Child Labor. World Bank Research Observer, 29(2),
202-234.
FAO. (2015). The State of Food adn Agriculture 2015. Retrieved from Rome:
Handa, S., Peterman, A., Seidenfeld, D., & Tembo, G. (2016). Income Transfers and Maternal Health:
Evidence from a National Randomized Social Cash Transfer Program in Zambia. Health
Economics, 25(2), 225-236.
Lagarde, M., Haines, A., & Palmer, N. (2007). Conditional cash transfers for improving uptake of health
interventions in low-and middle-income countries: a systematic review. Jama, 298(16), 1900-1910.
Lamadrid-Figueroa, H., Ángeles, G., Mroz, T., Urquieta-Salomon, J., Hernandez-Prado, B., Cruz-Valdez,
A., & Téllez-Rojo, M. M. (2010). Heterogeneous impact of the social programme Oportunidades
on use of contraceptive methods by young adult women living in rural areas. Journal of
development effectiveness, 2(1), 74-86.
Manley, J., Gitter, S., & Slavchevska, V. (2013). How effective are cash transfers at improving nutritional
status? World development, 48, 133-155.
Roelen, K. (2014). Sticks or carrots? Conditional cash transfers and their effect on child abuse and
neglect. Child abuse & neglect, 38(3), 372-382.
Seidenfeld, D., Handa, S., Tembo, S., Michelo, S., Harland Scott, C., & Prencipe, L. (2014). The Impact of
an Unconditional Cash Transfer on Food Security and Nutrition: The Zambia Child Grant
Programme. Retrieved from Brighton:
Veras Soares, F., Knowles, M., Daidone, S., & Tirivayi, N. (2016). Combined effects and synergies
between agricultural and social protection interventions: what is the evidence so far?

42

