BEYOND COVID-19:
Lessons for social
protection from WFP’s
work in East Africa in 2020

SAVING
LIVES
CHAN GING
LIVES

May 2021
Rachel Slater, Anna McCord, Stephen Devereux,
Daniela Baur, Danielle Trotter and Rosie Bright

Contents
Introduction ....................................................................................................................................................................................

3

Lesson 1: When social protection is expanded to respond to new shocks, adaptations to vulnerability assessment and
monitoring are required ..................................................................................................................................................................

4

Lesson 2: There is an urban social protection gap that needs to be filled ...............................................................................

6

Lesson 3: Identifying appropriate targeting approaches is a key challenge for scaling-up urban social protection............

7

Lesson 4: Social protection should prepare to respond to impacts on health systems .........................................................

8

Lesson 5: ‘Adaptive’ or ‘shock responsive’ social protection doesn’t only mean scale-up .....................................................

9

Lesson 6: Public works don’t have to be ‘public’ ..........................................................................................................................

10

Conclusion .......................................................................................................................................................................................

11

Introduction
Large scale covariate shocks, such as pandemics, can have a

Learning Facility to enhance evidence-based decision making,

significant impact on the lives of the most food and

learning and accountability in WFP’s social protection work in

nutritionally insecure, with both immediate and long-term

the context of COVID-19 and other shocks.

impacts. There is increasing recognition of the importance of

combined real-time evaluation of WFP’s activities with

strong social protection systems for effective response and

technical assistance to WFP staff who were navigating difficult

community resilience in the case of such events. The advent of

trade-offs as they sought to support governments to flex

the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 has provided a case of

social protection in the region. The Facility comprised social

significant learning and appreciation in relation to social

protection researchers and advisors who provided on demand

protection, and WFP’s current and potential role in support

support to WFP in areas of programme design, implementation

of social protection in the East Africa region. Chief amongst

and wider strategic considerations in WFP’s work, and offered

these lessons is the importance of, and challenges to, WFP’s

‘Ideas Space’ sessions to support the sharing of experiences.

responsibility to maintain and sustain support to the most
vulnerable through such large-scale shocks. Sustaining and
adapting

support

are

both

critical

to

the

continued

effectiveness of social protection in the challenging and
changed circumstances of a pandemic.

The Facility

This report is a product of the first phase of the facility
partnership and focuses on lessons learned from WFP’s work
in 2020 that are important for the social protection sector in
the region going forward.

WFP’s Regional Bureau in Nairobi (RBN) serves the East Africa
region including Burundi, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda,
Somalia, South Sudan and Rwanda, and as of December 2020,
also Sudan. In May 2020, RBN established a Social Protection

May 2021 | Beyond COVID-19: Lessons for social protection from WFP’s work in East Africa in 2020

3

LESSON 1:
When social protection is expanded to
respond to new shocks, adaptations to
vulnerability assessment and monitoring
are required.
In terms of the impacts on poverty, vulnerability and food

Alternatively, understanding of impact is based on predictive

security, empirical evidence of the impact of large-scale

modelling and evidence of food price changes. For example

covariate shocks can be limited due to challenges in data

WFP 2020 (p. 29) predicted an increase in Acute Food Insecurity

collection, for reasons outlined in Figure 1. The experience of

in 2020, compared to 2019, with greater numbers experiencing

COVID-19 provides an example of this in practice, with initial

Acute Food Insecurity in 2020 at a level of Phase 3 ‘Stressed’ or

evidence that COVID-19 was impacting on food security being

above (Phase 4 ‘Emergency’ , Phase 5 ‘Catastrophe/ Famine’)

either geographically patchy or anecdotal.

in a number of areas in the region. These include Ethiopia’s

Figure 1: Data collection challenges

lowlands, Burundi, Kenya and Somalia. The numbers of people
in Phase 3 or above in Uganda and South Sudan was predicted
to remain unchanged (but in South Sudan’s case at very high
levels).
Other adaptions to generate evidence on food insecurity
through COVID-19 have included strengthened use of remote
monitoring and assessments through platforms such as
mobile Vulnerability Analysis Mapping (mVAM). One example
is the assessment of food insecurity in urban and refugee
locations in Uganda. Figure 2 reveals significant increases in
the prevalence of food insecurity among urban residents,
refugees in Kampala and host communities in a single month,
from June to July 2020. Partnerships with other agencies such
as UN Habitat have also proved important, allowing for
evidence generation among urban populations not previously
covered by WFP.
However, the challenges are compounded further given that
other impacts on food security can occur at the same time.
During 2020, conflict and insecurity, locusts, floods and
droughts were all ongoing challenges in various parts of the
region, while good rains were experienced in other parts. The
result is that there is no solid empirical evidence to isolate the
additional impact of a pandemic, such as COVID-19, on food
security, beyond what is expected from other shocks. Parts of
the region have very serious food security challenges that

Source: GFRC (2020)
Global Food Crises September Update

COVID-19 is believed to have compounded, but evidence of
the extent of COVID-19’s additional impact is hard to establish.
In the early days of the pandemic, this proved challenging
particularly vis a vis some donors who were interested to

May 2021 | Beyond COVID-19: Lessons for social protection from WFP’s work in East Africa in 2020

4

isolate ‘COVID response’ from other activities.

Figure 2: Households with poor and borderline food

consumption in Uganda, June to July 2020

Source: WFP (2020) Uganda mVAM bulletin: July 2020 Urban Food Security Monitoring
One final point is important: the types of critical adaptations

months of support in a single distribution every three months,

made to programmes to reduce the risk that registration

it is difficult to demonstrate that this is sustained support

processes and distribution sites become vectors for COVID-19

rather than a one-off distribution. This is an important insight

transmission prove difficult to capture in existing monitoring

for the efforts of numerous agencies around the world that

systems.

seek to maximise linkages between humanitarian responses

For example, when programmes have switched

from a distribution on a monthly basis, to a combined three

and social protection.

May 2021 | Beyond COVID-19: Lessons for social protection from WFP’s work in East Africa in 2020

5

LESSON 2:
There is an urban social protection gap that
needs to be filled
A quarter of the population of East Africa, about 65 million

It is important not to underestimate the challenges of pivoting

people, live in urban areas, and about 60% of urban

to a greater focus on urban needs. COVID-19 has profoundly

employment is informal – mainly casual labour and petty

impacted on urban populations which are historically

trading. These livelihoods are acutely vulnerable to any

underserved by organisations such as WFP, particularly urban

disruptions1. Pandemics are an example of a large-scale

informal workers who are not covered by safety nets or social

covariate shock that makes this group particularly vulnerable.

insurance schemes. The crisis has highlighted a critical gap in

In Ethiopia, one study suggested that more than 6 million

humanitarian operations. Staff in government departments

formal and informal jobs could be lost due to COVID-19, and a

and their counterparts in international agencies are having to

survey found that 42% of firms in Addis Ababa had closed

switch focus from rural to urban.

after the lockdown was imposed. In informal settlements in
Nairobi, one-third of shops closed and between one-third and
half the working residents lost their sources of livelihood
completely. More than 80% of small and medium enterprises
in Kampala cut their workforce by more than half, leaving

With this comes a host of new challenges, for example,
adaptation of orthodox indicators and proxies for eligibility,
and revisions to activities for asset creation and livelihoods.
These are discussed in the following lessons.

were

Finally, while it is important to fill the urban social protection

disproportionately affected, constituting more than half of

gap, doing so at the expense of rural social protection needs

informal businesses in Africa2 and carrying gendered domestic

would be counter-productive. In the case of pandemics, it is

responsibilities. Women faced the dual constraint of loss or

likely that diagnosis and testing are greater in urban areas,

reduction in income-earning opportunities, and an increased

that rural-urban migrants will return to rural areas as

domestic burden of childcare after schools and childcare

livelihoods opportunities dry up in cities and towns, that

facilities were closed.

infection rates may be relatively high in more densely

thousands

of

Ugandans

unemployed.

Women

populated commercial agriculture areas, and that policyMost countries in East Africa started easing lockdown

makers and programmers will maximise the (currently limited)

restrictions and travel bans in June or July 2020, allowing

opportunities for people to fall back on rural livelihoods in

economic activity to resume. In Rwanda, where more than

crisis situations. All these considerations need to be kept in

half of small and medium enterprises closed after the

mind.

lockdown was imposed, many reopened, allowing workers to
return to work. Nonetheless, thousands of formal and
informal jobs have been lost, and those affected require
ongoing support.
The experience of COVID-19 has drawn attention to the limited
support that is currently delivered to urban residents by the
emerging social protection systems in East Africa. Urbanization
estimates plus fiscal constraints in the region have meant that
tackling the urban social protection gap has been viewed as a
challenge for the distant future. In 2014, East Africa was the
least urbanized region in the world and many of its countries
(including

Ethiopia,

Uganda

and

Kenya)

will

remain

predominantly rural beyond 20503. However, COVID-19 has
introduced new impetus to address the fact that the urban
working poor are excluded from virtually any social assistance
and social insurance, and can be particularly vulnerable to
large-scale covariate shocks.

This needs to be urgently

addressed.
1
2
3

Unless otherwise cited, all the statistics presented are from WFP/UNHabitat 2020.
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/africa-in-focus/2020/05/26/covid-19-and-the-future-of-work-in-africa-how-to-shore-up-incomes-for-informal-sectorworkers/
OECD (2017), Social Protection in East Africa: Harnessing the Future, OECD Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264274228-en

May 2021 | Beyond COVID-19: Lessons for social protection from WFP’s work in East Africa in 2020

6

LESSON 3:
Identifying appropriate targeting approaches is
a key challenge for scaling-up urban social
protection
Pandemics, with associated public health and other measures,

A more challenging alternative is a horizontal expansion to

affect vulnerability differently in urban versus rural settings,

individuals or households not covered by social protection.

and may require context-specific social protection modalities

Experiences in Rwanda highlight that the targeting criteria for

and targeting. The experience of COVID-19 highlights that a

the existing flagship social protection programme do not

lack of data on the differentiated impacts of pandemics or

necessarily align well with individuals and households that are

other covariate shocks in urban settings raises substantial

most affected by COVID-19, because targeting is designed to

challenges for identifying who is affected, and in what ways.

focus on indicators of poverty, vulnerability and food

This also then impacts on the capacity to define eligibility for

insecurity that make most sense in rural settings. Social

social

registries (ranked lists of poor and vulnerable households) can

protection

programmes,

accurately

identify

participants, and undertake registration.
Vertical expansions of social protection programmes are far
easier than setting up new programmes in terms of targeting,
because existing programme beneficiaries simply receive topups in addition to their regular support. But there are only
limited prospects for vertical expansion in urban areas,
because coverage is so low. In East Africa urban programmes
are small or fledgling or both, for example in Ethiopia the
Urban Productive Safety Net Programme covers a fraction of
the number of beneficiaries in its rural sister programme.
There are also questions about the equity of vertical
expansion: ‘Why give the same people more when you could
serve more people?’

provide a rapid route to targeting but even then there are
challenges – especially that the criteria on which the ranked
list is based may not be appropriate criteria for identifying
those most seriously affected by a large-scale covariate shock,
such as COVID-19. Furthermore, social registries – databases
of potential beneficiaries – are notably absent in most
countries in East Africa.

There are cases of integrated

beneficiary registries (which differ from social registries
because they list only programme beneficiaries, combined
across a number of different social protection programmes).
These can at least be used to reduce duplication or double
dipping. However, the rural bias of social protection coverage
limits even this possibility, as most integrated beneficiary
registries list predominantly rural individuals and households.
As also noted in Gentilini et al (2021), targeting and
registration systems can be leveraged in creative ways in
urban areas in order to address some of these challenges for
COVID-19 response, including using:

-

previous or existing beneficiary lists, such as
returning to those on waiting lists for programmes;

-

other government databases, such as national ID
data;

-

other data beyond government (such as data
held by humanitarian agencies, financial inclusion
programmes, mobile money systems, chambers
of commerce, and informal workers’ associations);

-

on-demand digital windows which can provide
high coverage and quick registration;

-

other forms of proactive outreach (eg use of media
or direct contact by SMS) to those not on any
existing system or list to promote on demand
registration (i.e. self-identification / self-targeting)

May 2021 | Beyond COVID-19: Lessons for social protection from WFP’s work in East Africa in 2020

7

LESSON 4:
Social protection should prepare to respond to
impacts on health systems
COVID-19 infections in the East Africa region did not increase

sector workers who form the majority of the labour force. The

at the rate initially anticipated by governments and

the high level of coverage of the mutuelle de santé health

international agencies in 2020. Growth in July and August, for

insurance scheme in Rwanda is a notable exception. Informal

instance, was lower than expected. While concerns remain

systems of social insurance – such as burial societies – have

about the rate and magnitude of testing and the accuracy of

collapsed in many areas under the burden of decades of high

data, infections remained far below what was predicted.

mortality rates among working age adults, including because

Ethiopia, the most populous country in the region, reported

of the HIV/AIDS pandemic.

the greatest number of recorded infections at 72,700 by endSeptember.

Across East Africa there are few examples of social insurance

The implication of not seeing a massive rise in COVID-19

cover, or life insurance and survivor benefits. Government

infections in the region has been lower morbidity and

announcements on social protection responses to COVID-19

mortality effects of the pandemic than initially anticipated,

have not yet begun to address future morbidity and mortality

and social protection responses that have predominantly

effects (nor the implications should COVID-19 become

focused on supporting households to deal with the impacts of

endemic in the region). The assumption has been that the

lockdowns and associated restrictions, rather than the

current focus should be on social transfers and responding to

impacts on households of illness and death.

the impacts of lockdowns and restrictions.

that can provide social health insurance and critical illness

This makes

However,

COVID-19 qualitatively different to the HIV/AIDS pandemic,

preparedness for future phases should include consideration

where the focus of support to affected households was about

of these wider impacts, not only on affected households but

coping with the costs of medical treatment and loss of

also on health systems, in terms of exploring support for

breadwinners.

expansion of social health insurance provision as well as other

At first glance, this focus on responding to the effects of
lockdowns appears appropriate, given lower than expected
morbidity and mortality rates. But it also raises questions
about the preparedness of the social protection system to
deal in the future with serious morbidity and mortality effects.
Social insurance provision and coverage in East Africa is low,
particularly because of the challenges of reaching informal

forms

of

social

insurance

and

social

assistance

to

accommodate both large-scale covariate shocks and also
idiosyncratic health events over the life cycle, as set out in the
social protection floor. These new or expanded forms for
health insurance will likely need to be long-term and sustained,
particularly if COVID-19 (or other future viruses) become
endemic in East Africa.

May 2021 | Beyond COVID-19: Lessons for social protection from WFP’s work in East Africa in 2020

8

LESSON 5:
‘Adaptive’ or ‘shock responsive’ social
protection doesn’t only mean scale-up
Whilst much focus is rightly placed on the increased needs
generated by a large covariate shock, it can also introduce new
challenges in meeting existing responsibilities to the most

COVID-19. Examples include:

-

‘COVID-proofing’

operations

to

ensure

that

vulnerable and food insecure. The challenges presented by

targeting, registration, training, asset creation

COVID-19 are a good example of this, as WFP’s primary focus

activities and distributions did not become sites for

was on adaptation to ensure all those currently receiving

infection to spread. This included the introduction

support could continue to do so, even despite new access,

of new standard operating procedures (e.g. social

monitoring, and funding constraints.

distancing in queues), the provision of hygiene and
sanitation equipment for beneficiaries, use of PPE

The global focus on social protection for COVID-19 response

by staff, temporary relaxation of levels of

has been dominated by programme expansion and the

verification (especially the collection of biometric

development of new programmes. However, WFP’s experience

data during registration), and larger transfers

provides lessons about the importance and challenges of

distributed less regularly (e.g. monthly payments

maintaining

made bi-monthly).

and

sustaining

existing

social

protection

programmes. Maintaining delivery of ongoing programmes
does not receive much attention but is a critical part of the

-

delivering ‘school feeding at home’ (WFP, 2020)

social protection response. Households that were vulnerable,

when schools were closed; and establishing new

poor or food insecure before COVID-19 did not suddenly start

standard operating procedures and guidance for

managing during the pandemic – on the contrary, in many

those delivering meals in countries such as Burundi

cases their vulnerability, poverty and food insecurity
intensified. Yet donor agencies in particular have tended to be
more preoccupied with expanding to reach more people in

switching from providing meals at school to

where schools remained open (Figure 4).

-

adapting asset creation and livelihoods activities to

need rather than maintaining support to existing caseloads.

make them more appropriate in urban contexts. A

WFP in the region has focused on maintaining and sustaining

safety net shifted support from livelihoods and

existing social protection support, working to mobilise

income generating activities focused on the

additional funds for expansion only where existing caseloads

delivery of personal services (such as hairdressing)

were supported. This has included adaptations to social

to livelihoods that can take place in the open air

protection and broader safety net programming and delivery

and provide produce for market sale or own-

in response to the unique circumstances and demands of

consumption, such as home gardening.

good example is South Sudan, where WFP’s urban

Figure 4: Guidance for safe school meal production during COVID-19 in Burundi

May 2021 | Beyond COVID-19: Lessons for social protection from WFP’s work in East Africa in 2020

9

LESSON 6:
Public works don’t have to be ‘public’

The COVID-19 pandemic has prompted a substantial rethink
of which asset creation and livelihoods activities are
appropriate and feasible in public works programmes.
Discussions are ongoing in the region about the sorts of asset
creation activities that are appropriate i) in the context of
COVID-19 given the risks of spreading the virus and ii) in urban
contexts where much adapted or new programming is likely to
be focused.
The experience of COVID-19 has seen

governments and

organisations pivot approaches to asset creation programmes
in the region in two significant ways:

1. adjusting focus to water, sanitation and hygiene
work in urban contexts, for example, in Kenya;
2. allowing participants to undertake private asset
creation, as undertaken in Burundi and South
Sudan.
Traditionally,

activities

involving

asset

creation

are

predominantly focused on the rural economy, particularly on
livelihoods related to natural resources and agriculture.
Switching to a focus on water, sanitation and hygiene works in
urban contexts enabled these programmes to meet urban
needs, whilst also reducing a significant risk factor to pandemic
spread in these environments by increasing access to hand
washing (for example, cash for work programming in Nairobi
and Mombasa).
This second switch, to allow private asset creation such as
promoting backyard gardening as a method to maintain food
production systems, is, in some ways, remarkable. For many
decades public works programmes have been, as their name
suggests, entirely focused on the creation of shared or public
or community assets. Suggestions that it would be appropriate
to allow work to take place on private land or to produce
private assets have been treated sceptically. COVID-19 has
provided an indication of what might be possible – the creation
of assets that are likely to be maintained by their owners in
the long term, and to be directly useful to improving people’s
livelihoods. While public works for private assets has rarely
been a policy option previously, COVID-19 provides an entry
point for it to be taken more seriously.

May 2021 | Beyond COVID-19: Lessons for social protection from WFP’s work in East Africa in 2020

10

Conclusion
The experience of COVID-19 has provided important learning

monitoring to enable a better picture of the needs of

for WFP in social protection response to large-scale covariate

vulnerable groups for robust social protection design; and

shocks such as pandemics. Chief among these is the

willingness to consider new programme designs when

importance of adaptation. Enabling WFP systems to adapt to

traditional methods are not possible or appropriate.

new challenges presented by large covariate shocks has been
shown to be critical to WFP’s capacity to maintain and sustain
critical social protection support to current populations in the
face of new obstacles. It also provides entry points for new
learning, and a forward-looking agenda for more effective
social protection support in the long-term. This includes
highlighting the needs of traditionally underserved groups,
notably vulnerable urban populations, and providing new

WFP has a strong skill-set enabling it to adapt to new
challenges, and maintain support through shocks, working
across its dual humanitarian and development mandate,
including expanding where needed. This is a critical
contribution that WFP is able to make to the government-led
development of nationally owned shock-responsive social
protection systems in Africa.

safety net support; adjustments to data collection and

May 2021 | Beyond COVID-19: Lessons for social protection from WFP’s work in East Africa in 2020

11

Photo Credits
Cover Photo : WFP/Hugh Rutherford
Photo page 3: WFP/Musa Mahadi
Photo page 5: WFP/Musa Mahadi
Photo page 7: WFP/Ismail Taxta
Photo page 8: John Paul Sesonga
Photo page 10: WFP/Hugh Rutherford
Photo page 11: WFP/Alessandro Abbonizio

Contact Information
For more information contact :
Danielle Trotter, danielle.trotter@wfp.org

12

